The Project Gutenberg EBook of Sanctification, by J. W. Byers

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Sanctification

Author: J. W. Byers

Release Date: September 23, 2008 [EBook #26691]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SANCTIFICATION ***




Produced by Charlene Taylor, Carla Foust, Joel Erickson
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









Transcriber's note

Minor punctuation errors have been corrected without notice. A few
obvious typographical errors have been corrected, and they are listed
at the end.




     SANCTIFICATION


     Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people with
     his own blood, suffered without the gate. Heb. 13:12.

     By J. W. BYERS
     Printed in 1902 by GOSPEL TRUMPET COMPANY




     CONTENTS


     What Is Sanctification?                       5

     The Apostolic Experience                     11

     Consecration and Dedication                  19

     The Holy Spirit of Promise                   25

     Our Inheritance                              32

     Sanctified by Faith                          39

     The Subtraction Process                      45

     Christian Perfection                         51

     Holiness                                     58

     The Vine and The Branches                    64

     Some Helpful Thoughts on Consecration        69

     Questions and Answers                        76

     Personal Experience                          90




What is Sanctification?


Scripturally, the word =sanctification= has three meanings: First,
separation; second, dedication; third, spirit-filling. Webster's
definition of it is as follows: "1. Sanctification is the act of God's
grace by which the affections of man are purified, or alienated from sin
and the world, and exalted to a supreme love of God; also, the state of
being thus purified or sanctified. 2. The act of consecrating, or
setting apart for a sacred purpose." "=Sanctifier.= One who sanctifies or
makes holy; specifically, the Holy Ghost." "=Sanctify.= 1. To set apart to
a holy or religious use. 2. To make holy or free from sin; to cleanse
from moral corruption or pollution; to make holy by detaching the
affections from the world and its defilements and exalting them to a
supreme love of God." Scripturally and practically, the terms
sanctification, holiness, purity, and perfection are synonymous.
=Holiness=, Separation: setting apart; sacredness. =Purity.= Cleanness;
chastity. =Perfection.= Completeness; wholeness. All this is comprehended
in one word, =sanctification=.

It is evident that this term signifies much more in the New Testament
sense than it does in the Old Testament. In the Old Testament it meant
but a dedication, a setting apart to a holy use, as in the example of
the sanctification of the tabernacle and its contents--the altar and
laver, and all the vessels belonging thereto--and Aaron and his sons and
their garments. Lev. 8:10-30. In this dispensation of grace it means
infinitely more; for in that dispensation it was but an outward and
ceremonial work, but now it is an inwrought work, permeating and
purifying the affections through and through by the cleansing blood and
heavenly fire, and filling the dedicated temple, our body, with the Holy
Ghost, as in the example of the early church at Pentecost.

The justified believer must meet the conditions of complete separation
and exclusive dedication of himself to God, in a sense that no guilty
sinner can do. This is the believer's part. He must purify himself.
"Every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as he is
pure."--1 John 3:3. "Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved,
let us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit,
perfecting holiness in the fear of God."--2 Cor. 7:1. This brings the
believer into the condition where God can fulfill his part. He can now
take exclusive possession of the dedicated temple, and sanctify it. "And
the very God of peace sanctify you wholly."--1 Thess. 5:23. "And they
were all filled with the Holy Ghost."--Acts 2:4. This brings the
believer into a more perfect spiritual relationship with God than when
simply justified.


Sanctification A Bible Doctrine

"And now, brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace,
which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all
them which are sanctified." Acts 20:32.

"To open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from
the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins,
and inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith that is in
me."--Acts 26:18.

"Sanctify them through thy truth: thy word is truth.... And for their
sakes I sanctify myself, that they also might be sanctified through the
truth. Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall
believe on me through their word."--John 17:17, 19, 20.

"If a man therefore purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto
honour, sanctified, and meet for the master's use, and prepared unto
every good work."--2 Tim. 2:21.

"That every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in
sanctification and honour."--1 Thess. 4:4.


God Our Sanctifier

"And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly; and I pray God your
whole spirit and soul and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ. Faithful is he that calleth you, who also will do
it."--1 Thess. 5:23, 24.

"Jude, the servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James, to them that
are sanctified by God the Father, and preserved in Jesus Christ, and
called."--Jude 1.


Sanctified In Christ

"Unto the church of God which is at Corinth, to them that are sanctified
in Christ Jesus." "But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made
unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption."--1 Cor. 1:2, 30.


Sanctified Through the Truth

"Sanctify them through thy truth; thy word is truth."--John 17:17. "That
he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the
word."--Eph. 5:26.


By The Blood of Jesus

"Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people with his own
blood, suffered without the gate." "For if the blood of bulls and of
goats, and the ashes of an heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifieth to
the purifying of the flesh: how much more shall the blood of Christ, who
through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge
your conscience from dead works to serve the living God?" "By the which
will we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ
once for all." "For by one offering he hath perfected for ever them that
are sanctified."

"Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy,
who hath trodden under foot the Son of God, and hath counted the blood
of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and hath
done despite unto the Spirit of grace?"--Heb. 13:12; 9:13, 14; 10:10,
14, 29.


And The Holy Spirit

"That I should be the minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles,
ministering the gospel of God, that the offering up of the Gentiles
might be acceptable, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost."--Rom. 15:16.
"But we are bound to give thanks alway to God for you, brethren beloved
of the Lord, because God hath from the beginning chosen you to salvation
through sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth."--2 Thess.
2:13.

These and many other texts of scripture teach us that sanctification is
a Bible doctrine. There is but one reason why some people can not see it
in the Bible--their eyes are blinded. All who are willing to yield
themselves to God and His word, will soon be taught this blessed truth.
Jesus prayed that His disciples might become sanctified. They had not
yet come into this experience. Jesus knew that they needed it. It was
His desire for their highest good. They were not able to go forth and
cope with the powers of sin. They had been under the teaching of the
Master and in His presence, and therefore were protected by Him from the
enemy; but now he was soon to be taken from them, and He knew that they
must be "endued with power from on high." Therefore He implored the
Father for the sanctification of the eleven; and not "for these alone,"
but "for them also which shall believe on me through their word." This
reaches down through the entire gospel dispensation. It is His blessed
will that we all shall be sanctified. As justified believers, we each
are as needy of this grace as were the eleven disciples. It is
indispensable for our spiritual welfare.

Some are disposed to look upon this matter as optional with them; but
such is a mistake. The time comes in the experience of every true
believer when the Holy Spirit brings before him the conditions of a
definite and absolute consecration. A refusal to meet these conditions,
done ignorantly, will bring a cloud over our experience of justification
and, eventually, if persisted in wilfully, will bring us into God's
utter disapproval. "Therefore to him that knoweth to do good, and doeth
it not, to him it is sin."--Jas. 4:17.

Sanctification is the normal state of the Christian. The Father, Son and
Holy Spirit are jointly interested in us, that we attain unto this
grace. Our unity with the Godhead is incomplete without it, so also is
our unity with each other; "For both he that sanctifieth and they who
are sanctified are all of one: for which cause he is not ashamed to call
them brethren."--Heb. 2:11. A heart washed and made pure by the blood of
Christ and filled with the Holy Spirit will always be in perfect
fellowship with divinity, and also with all other hearts of like
experience. The unsanctified heart of the believer cannot be fully
satisfied, because of the consciousness of the presence of the carnal
nature, more scripturally called "our old man." Just what it is may not
perhaps be perfectly understood by the new convert, but that something
abnormal exists will soon be discovered, and there will be a longing in
the heart for an inward cleansing--a normal desire for the normal
experience. On the other hand, when this blessed experience is attained,
there comes with it the consciousness of inward purity which fully
satisfies the heart, and it can sing with the spirit and with the
understanding, "Hallelujah for the cleansing; it has reached my inmost
soul."

For this purpose Christ gave himself for the church--"That he might
sanctify and cleanse it." God gave him to the world that whosoever
believes in him shall not perish, but have everlasting life, for our
justification; but Christ gave himself for the church, for our
sanctification.

The gospel commission of the apostle Paul specifies clearly the doctrine
of sanctification, the "inheritance among them which are sanctified." He
could not have been faithful to this commission without leading souls
from "forgiveness of sins" into this "inheritance." His ministry and
epistles to the different churches prove his faithfulness. Upon his
first acquaintance with the brethren at Ephesus he asked them the
question, "Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye believed?" And after
three years of faithful ministry in that city, upon the solemn event of
his departure from them, among his last words he reminds the church of
the "inheritance among all them which are sanctified." Then about four
years later, while a prisoner at Rome, he writes back to them his
epistle to the Ephesians, which in every chapter sparkles with beautiful
gems of thought upon the subject of sanctification. In his letter to the
church of Rome we are forcibly reminded that this doctrine was prominent
in his teaching, employing such terms as, "this grace wherein we stand"
(Rom. 5:2), "our old man is crucified," "that the body of sin might be
destroyed," "dead indeed unto sin," "free from sin" (Chap. 6), "married
to ... him who is raised from the dead" (Chap. 7), "present your bodies
a living sacrifice" (Chap. 12) "being sanctified by the Holy Ghost"
(Chap. 15). These terms and others signify the precious experiences of
sanctification.

In the first and second epistles to the Corinthians we also notice the
mention of this experience, and that there were some saints at Corinth
that were sanctified (1:2, 30), although some were not, and were told
that they were yet carnal. There were evidently only the two
classes--sanctified and justified, in the church there, the same as is
usually the case everywhere today. In speaking of the congregation, he
says "But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in
the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of God."--1 Cor. 6:11. In
the second epistle, Chap. 7:1, he exhorts them: "Let us cleanse
ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting
holiness in the fear of God," and among the closing words of this
letter, he says, "Be perfect."

Thus we can see in all the epistles of this apostle, the theme of
sanctification. His personal testimony to the Galatians reads: "I am
crucified with Christ." His statement to the brethren at Philippi was:
"As many as be perfect"; to those at Colosse: "Ye are dead and your life
is hid with Christ in God," "Ye have put off the old man with his deeds,
and have put on the new man"; his teaching in the epistles to the
Thessalonians, showing them that sanctification is the will of God to
them, and his desire that the "God of peace sanctify you wholly." His
instructions to Timothy show how we may become a vessel "sanctified and
meet for the Master's use," and he refers to the fact that there were
some who "call on the Lord out of a pure heart." His letter to Titus, in
which he mentions how Jesus gave himself for us, that he might "purify
unto himself a peculiar people." These all add testimony to this
doctrine and the apostle's faithfulness in his ministry. Some scholars
think Apollos is the author of the epistle to the Hebrews; but whether
Paul or Apollos, it abounds with truth upon sanctification.

All the other writers of the New Testament teach the same truth. James
says, "Purify your hearts, ye double-minded." Peter gives emphasis to
the doctrine of holiness: "Be ye holy," and that "we, being dead to
sins, should live unto righteousness"; and desires that the God of all
grace "make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you;" and that at
the coming of Christ "ye may be found of him in peace, without spot and
blameless." Jude addresses his epistle "to them that are sanctified,"
and "preserved."

Then when we search the writings of John we are almost overwhelmed with
glory, as we read his beautiful teachings upon this theme, which he so
clearly sets forth. God grant that we all may "walk in the light as he
is in the light," walking "even as he walked," that his love in us may
be "perfected," that we may prayerfully hold fast and abide in this
"unction from the Holy One," that the "anointing" may abide in us. Such
an experience can be realized only by every one that "purifieth himself
even as he is pure."




CHAPTER II

The Apostolic Experience


"All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness:
that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good
works."--2 Tim. 3:16, 17.

In our study of this theme we find that the word of God is our only
standard to prove that sanctification is a Bible doctrine. The
experience and testimony of the Bible writers and the other apostles of
the early church also prove to us and teach the nature of this doctrine
and its relative position to the experience of justification. It will be
important and profitable for us to review these experiences, not only to
establish the doctrine in our faith, but also to examine our own hearts
and see that our experiences are truly apostolic.

The author of this treatise was sanctified at a time when there was a
battle raging against the doctrine as a second work of grace. He had
himself taken a stand against it for some years, because it did not seem
that the scriptures and apostolic testimonies were sufficiently clear to
establish the second-work doctrine. In this he had been blinded by the
theories on the opposing side, notwithstanding the brilliant
testimonies to the contrary of those whose lives were unimpeachable. Of
course it was impossible to consecrate for and receive the experience
under such circumstances, and consequently years of unsatisfactory
experience passed by, until at last the indisputable symptoms of inborn
depravity, and the deplorable weakness of the heart and will to cope
with the mighty power of the enemy, brought the struggling soul into
depths of despair at the feet of Jesus, crying, "Forgive me, O Lord, for
all my sad failures, and 'create in me a clean heart, O God.'" It was
not a question at this crisis about it being a second work of grace. The
crying need of the soul was a clean heart. It was all too evident that
the heart was not clean, and it was also evident that it was the will of
God, even my sanctification; and dear loved ones were daily proving by
life and testimony that the experience was attainable.

It will be sufficient to say at present that the definite consecration
and definite faith in the definite promises of God brought the definite
experience. The inward struggle was over, and the soul had entered into
its promised land--the heavenly rest; "for we which have believed do
enter into rest."--Heb. 4:3. Experimentally, the question of the second
work was most thoroughly and satisfactorily answered, and it seemed as
clear as the noonday sun in a cloudless sky. The internal evidence was
overwhelming, and now it only remained necessary to become established
scripturally, which, by the study of the apostolic experiences and
testimonies, was by the anointing received in due time. Praise God!

Were it not for the perverted teaching, every truly justified child of
God would soon be led by the Holy Spirit into this grace, because it is
the inheritance of the soul, and its normal state. The apostles before
Pentecost needed it, and so does every other child of God. Let us
briefly consider the experience of the apostolic brethren, both before
and upon their Pentecost.

=They were born of God before Pentecost.= This is very definitely
established by the following scriptures. "Whosoever believeth that Jesus
is the Christ is born of God"--1 John 5:1. "He saith unto them, But whom
say ye that I am? And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art the
Christ, the Son of the living God."--Matt. 16:15, 16. "But as many as
received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to
them that believe on his name: which were born, not of blood, nor of the
will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God."--John 1:12, 13.
"Nathanael answered and saith unto him, Rabbi, thou art the Son of
God."--John 1:49. "Then saith he to Thomas, Reach hither thy finger, and
behold my hands; and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side;
and be not faithless, but believing. And Thomas answered and said unto
him, My Lord and my God. Jesus saith unto him, Thomas, because thou hast
seen me, thou hast believed: blessed are they that have not seen, and
yet have believed."--John 20:27-29.

This is sufficient to prove their experience, both before and after the
death and resurrection of Christ. Some would contend that the disciples
could not have been regenerated in a true New Testament sense before
Pentecost, because the plan of salvation was not finished before
Christ's death on the cross. If this were true, there is sufficient in
the foregoing text (John 20:27-29) to prove that the eleven were
enjoying the regenerating grace; for they all had at least as much faith
as Thomas, that Jesus is the Christ; and when Thomas was invited to
prove to his own satisfaction that Jesus had indeed risen from the dead,
he at once acknowledged him "My Lord and my God." This was after the
atonement for sin was made, and the disciples believed in him and beyond
doubt were justified and born of God in the perfect New Testament sense.
This not only is true of the eleven, but equally so of all who believed
that he arose from the dead; for he said, "Blessed are they that have
not seen and yet have believed."

The language of the apostle to the Roman brethren (Chap. 10:9, 10) adds
to this testimony--"That if thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord
Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from
the dead, thou shalt be saved. For with the heart man believeth unto
righteousness; and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation."
The apostle John says (1 John 2:29), "If ye know that he is righteous,
ye know that every one that doeth righteousness is born of him." He also
says, "Every one that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God."--1 John
4:7.

=Their names were written in heaven.= "Notwithstanding in this rejoice
not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice, because
your names are written in heaven."--Luke 10:20. The critic will say that
this was said of the seventy and not of the twelve. Well, it was said of
the seventy, but how could it be less true of the twelve whom he had
previously chosen and sent out to preach the kingdom of God, to cast out
devils, and to heal the sick? It is likely that a number of those
seventy, if not all, were among the one hundred twenty at Pentecost. To
say the least concerning the spiritual standing of the twelve, they were
equal with the seventy.

=They were not of the world.= "If ye were of the world, the world would
love his own: but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you
out of the world, therefore the world hateth you."--John 15:19. "I have
given them thy word; and the world hath hated them, because they are not
of the world, even as I am not of the world.... They are not of the
world, even as I am not of the world." John 17:14,16.

=They kept the word of God.= "I have manifested thy name unto the men
which thou gavest me out of the world: thine they were, and thou gavest
them me; and they have kept thy word. For I have given unto them the
words which thou gavest me; and they have received them, and have known
surely that I came out from thee, and they have believed that thou didst
send me."--John 17:6, 8.

=They belonged to God.= "I pray for them: I pray not for the world, but
for them which thou hast given me; for they are thine. All mine are
thine, and thine are mine; and I am glorified in them."--John 17:9, 10.

This was the spiritual condition of the eleven before Pentecost
testified to by Jesus himself. It is certainly a blessed condition--born
of God, their names written in heaven, not of the world. They belonged
to God, and they kept His word. Would that every professing follower of
Jesus were in this blessed state. It would produce a revolution in
Christendom. Does not this signify all that can possibly be comprehended
in justification?

Then after the blood of Jesus had been shed and the ransom for sin paid,
he opened their understanding (Luke 24:45) that they might understand
the scriptures, how he should suffer and rise again from the dead. We
see that they believed in him the Redeemer, and now understood the
object of his suffering and death; but there was still a glorious work
of grace awaiting them, to be inwrought by the Holy Ghost, the
sanctifier.

=They were not yet sanctified=, and for this reason Jesus prayed for them
as he did. He well knew that they could not be kept from the evil of the
world in a manner that would prove satisfactory to themselves and the
Father, unless there should be accomplished in them more than had yet
been done. Therefore he prayed, "Sanctify them through thy truth, thy
word is truth."--John 17:17.

=They had not yet received the Holy Ghost.= "And, behold, I send the
promise of my Father upon you: but tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem,
until ye be endued with power from on high."--Luke 24:49. "For John
truly baptized with water: but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost
not many days hence."

=This promise was fulfilled.= "And when the day of Pentecost was fully
come, they were all with one accord in one place. And suddenly there
came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all
the house where they were sitting. And there appeared unto them cloven
tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them. And they were all
filled with the Holy Ghost."--Acts 2:1-4.

We will presently consider the testimony of the apostle Peter with
reference to this experience at Pentecost, but will first notice the
experience of


Cornelius And His Household

This brother was a devout man; he feared God with all his house; he
prayed to God always and gave much alms, which were accepted of God and
were had in remembrance in his sight; he had a good report. God heard
his prayers, accepted him, and answered his prayers; and he and his
household were all anxious to hear the preaching of Peter, testifying,
"Now therefore are we all here present before God, to hear all things
that are commanded thee of God."--Acts 10:33.

This was not a company of sinners. Peter did not preach repentance to
them. Although they were Gentiles and did not have the privileges that
many others had and were not acquainted with the apostles, they were
acquainted with God. Peter expressed his surprise at this, saying, "Of a
truth, I perceive that God is no respecter of persons: but in every
nation he that feareth him, and worketh righteousness, is accepted with
him." Acts 10:34, 35. Here Peter testifies both to the righteousness and
to the acceptance with God of this household.

From Peter's statement in Acts 11:14, in his testimony to the church
concerning this event, a doubt might arise as to this company being
saved in the full New Testament justification. He refers to the words of
the angel in his message to Cornelius, instructing him to send for
Peter, "Who shall teach thee words whereby thou and all thy house shall
be saved." But this statement in itself cannot be interpreted to mean
that this company were not already justified. We have a parallel
statement of Peter in his testimony to the church upon another occasion,
when he again refers to the grace of God to the Gentile world, saying
(Acts 15:10, 11), "Now therefore why tempt ye God, to put a yoke upon
the neck of the disciples, which neither our fathers nor we were able to
bear? But we believe that through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ we
shall be saved, even as they." The term "saved" in both these instances
signifies more than justification; for truly Peter and the disciples to
whom he was speaking in this last instance were justified.

The household of Cornelius were ready with open hearts to receive all
that God had for them, and while Peter spoke the word of God to them
"the Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the word." This experience
was identical in character with that of the Jewish saints at Pentecost.


Peter's Testimony

In rehearsing this wonderful event to the brethren and apostles at
Jerusalem he testified to the unquestionable leading of the Spirit to
this company of believers. He said (Acts 11:15, 17), "And as I began to
speak, the Holy Ghost fell on them, as on us at the beginning. Forasmuch
then as God gave them the like gift as he did unto us, who believed on
the Lord Jesus Christ; what was I, that I could withstand God?" Upon
another occasion at Jerusalem Peter again spoke of the same event,
saying, "And God, which knoweth the hearts, bare them witness, giving
them the Holy Ghost, even as he did unto us; and put no difference
between us and them, purifying their hearts by faith."--Acts 15:8, 9.
But Peter testified to the fact that the Gentiles are placed upon a
level with the Jews, not only in the reception of the Holy Spirit, but
in the experience of cleansing. He testified to these two phases of
sanctification, equally wrought in the hearts of the Jews and Gentiles,
making "no difference between us and them"; and in this same testimony
he plainly states that "purifying their hearts" was an experience
co-incident with the reception of the Holy Ghost--"giving them the Holy
Ghost," "purifying their hearts," "even as he did unto us." Opposers of
this truth have argued that Peter's statement, "purifying their hearts,"
in the Greek text reads, "having purified their hearts," the word
"having" signifying that their hearts were purified previous to the
event of their reception of the Holy Ghost; but this objection has no
foundation in scripture, history, or experience. If there could be a
shadow of meaning in this form of this word in the Greek text, to
signify that the "purifying their hearts" occurred prior to the
outpouring of the Holy Ghost, it simply has reference to the order of
these two phases of sanctification, which were effected within them upon
this occasion.

It is evident that in the divine order of sanctification purifying the
heart by faith is preparatory to the outpouring of the Holy Spirit. He
must have a pure heart in which to make his abode. However, there is no
lapse of time perceptible between the =negative= and =positive= phase of
sanctification. How easily this is understood by those who have truly
received the Pentecostal experience. How the "anointing" teaches us and
witnesses in our hearts to the testimony of Peter; but to those who have
not yet had their Pentecost, and especially such as are blinded by
theory and the doctrines of men, there is likely to be discussion and
argument of words. The apostles and brethren at Jerusalem had no
argument to make when Peter rehearsed his experience. They simply
"glorified God."


Paul's Testimony

"Nevertheless, brethren, I have written the more boldly unto you in some
sort, as putting you in mind, because of the grace that is given to me
of God, that I should be the minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles,
ministering the gospel of God, that the offering up of the Gentiles
might be acceptable, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost."--Romans 15:15,
16.

This testimony agrees with Peter in his account of the outpouring of the
Holy Ghost upon the Gentile believers. It is not plainly stated that
Paul has reference to this event in his testimony quoted, yet we can see
clearly that he does have reference to the experience of sanctification,
and that it is identical with that of all believers, being a specific
work of the Holy Ghost.


Experiences of the Brethren at Samaria

"Then Philip went down to the city of Samaria, and preached Christ unto
them. But when they believed Philip preaching the things concerning the
kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both
men and women."--Acts 8:5, 12. About three years prior to this time
there was a greater One than Philip at Samaria preaching the words of
life, and many more than the woman at the well believed, and they said
to the woman, "Now we believe, not because of thy saying: for we have
heard him ourselves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, the
Saviour of the world."--John 4:42. This was an effectual introduction of
the gospel, and when Philip went to that city he found much good soil
for the precious word in the name of Jesus Christ. There is no room for
doubt as to the acceptable condition of these converts. They believed
in the name of Jesus and were baptized. Some had doubtless remained firm
believers since Jesus' visit to that city; others believed through the
preaching of Philip. Certainly they were justified by faith in the name
of Jesus, but like the disciples before Pentecost they were not yet
sanctified, and when the apostles at Jerusalem heard of this work of
grace at Samaria they sent down Peter and John, "who when they were come
down, prayed for them, that they might receive the Holy Ghost: (For as
yet he was fallen upon none of them: only they were baptized in the name
of the Lord Jesus) then laid they their hands on them, and they received
the Holy Ghost."--Acts 8:15-17.

How clearly the inspired record here proves the second work of grace,
and how beautifully this event harmonizes with the others relative to
the outpouring of the Holy Spirit. And then, how glorious to have an
experience like it in our own hearts. Praise God for this glorious,
vivid, and living reality which by its divine power pales every theory
into utter obscurity.




CHAPTER III.

Consecration and Dedication


"I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye
present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which
is your reasonable service. And be not conformed to this world: but be
ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is
that good, and acceptable, and perfect, will of God."--Romans 12:1, 2.

In this chapter we will notice the scriptures upon the theme of
consecration and dedication--the important step necessary on the part of
the justified believer, before he can enter into this blessed grace of
entire sanctification.

We find that in the old dispensation everything that was to be employed
in the service of God necessarily had to be consecrated. In the
tabernacle and temple service every vessel and article of furniture,
even the smallest spoon, the tongs, and snuffers, together with the
building itself, and all the priests and their garments, were
consecrated wholly unto God, to be used for no other purpose than
divine service. This setting apart for holy service was the Old
Testament sanctification. The setting apart of these things, together
with the ceremonial application of what God had ordained to be used in
this dedication, was acceptable in his sight.

This consecration in the old dispensation is but a shadow of the new. It
was God's own way of sanctification--making things holy unto himself.
The mere declaration on the part of Moses, in the consecration of these
things, that they were now holy, would not have been sufficient without
the careful observance of the application of the blood of animals and
the holy anointing oil, which were typical of the blood of Jesus and the
Holy Spirit. Some of the articles of the tabernacles and temple were
sanctified simply by a setting apart and sprinkling with oil (Lev.
8:10), while others required the application of oil and blood. Lev.
8:11, 15. In the consecration of Aaron and his sons the anointing oil
and the blood were applied. Without this they would not have been
sanctified. Lev. 8:30. The apostle speaks of this in his letter to the
Hebrews--"For if the blood of bulls and of goats, and the ashes of a
heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifieth to the purifying of the
flesh: how much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal
Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from
dead works to serve the living God?"--Heb. 9:13.

The importance of an exclusive dedication to the service of God should
impress our minds with deep solemnity. Anything held back from such a
dedication would most certainly have been rejected in the old
dispensation, and truly it is the same in the new. Many professing to
follow Jesus into a thorough consecration, are at heart disposed to keep
back some treasured idol. Many have doubtless made a profession of
sanctification, and yet have never made a definite consecration. Such
are deceived, and never know the joys of this glorious experience. The
cleansing blood and the Holy Spirit will never be applied to the heart
that is not absolutely consecrated.

It is both scriptural and logical that we present our bodies a living
sacrifice, not only for service but for actual sacrifice in a definite
and absolute consecration. We have no bad things to present to the Lord
in this consecration; for we are not sinners. We would not be proper
candidates for sanctification if we were clinging to anything sinful.
Everything sinful must be forsaken and denounced by the guilty sinner
when he comes to God for pardon. Otherwise he would never be forgiven of
his sins. The world, the flesh, and the devil are forsaken in true
repentance. "Denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world." Therefore all
sinful things are laid aside forever in repentance. This is the Bible
signification of repentance: To give up all sinful things. But the Bible
signification of consecration is to present to Jesus all the sacred
treasures of our hearts--give up all our good things.

       *       *       *       *       *

No sinner can make a definite Bible consecration; for he has no good
things to bring to God. He is guilty and condemned in the sight of God.
It is the justified believer who has learned by experience that his
inward spiritual condition is not yet satisfactory. It may have been for
a time; but he sooner or later becomes aware that there is a deeper work
of grace needed. He doubts not that he is justified, but knows that
something more must be wrought within. Through the ministry of the word
of God and the blessed guidance of the Holy Spirit, he is soon taught
that a definite consecration must be made as one of the Bible conditions
for sanctification. Now comes the searching and far-reaching question:
Are you willing to make this consecration? This means everything to the
soul. All the sacred God-given treasures around which the heart's
affections have so closely entwined, and which have become a part of the
very life itself, are now required to be yielded up to Jesus as a
voluntary offering. There is no danger that anything will be forgotten;
for the heart-searching eye of God will reveal every hidden treasure,
and make known the depths of meaning to the soul, which will be
astounded to know as never before how much it means to lay all of itself
and sacred treasures at the feet of Jesus. There comes an inward
struggle, perhaps. The heart's affections tighten around the sacred
objects of its love, until they seem dearer than ever before; but while
this is being done there comes a sadness stealing over the soul; for
whereas these objects seem so sacred and precious, there is a
consciousness within that Jesus is slighted. The affections are divided
between Jesus and these treasures. He asks the question, "Lovest thou me
more than these?" You can answer, "Yes, Lord; thou knowest that I love
thee." But must I give up these treasures, these sacred things of my
heart for thee? Can not I have both them and thee? This is where death
must set in. Thank God, it is the death-route, the only road to this
glorious Canaan of soul-rest.

It soon becomes a significant fact thoroughly understood that Jesus
requires the undivided heart and every affection. You cannot refuse him.
He has done too much for you. He suffered without the gate that he might
sanctify you with his own blood. He gave himself for the church that he
might sanctify and cleanse it; and now how can you withhold anything
from him? He has a just right to all your affections. He gave his all
for you, and now it is right that you should give your all for him. He
sacrificed his life for you; now you are brought to the sacrifice of
your life for him--a living sacrifice. You see that this claim is right
and just. It is a reasonable requirement on his part; a "reasonable
service" on your part.

But, dear reader, the question must be answered. Are you going to yield?
You may answer, Yes; but the Lord requires you to do so at once. Usually
when the soul is brought face to face with this consecration and begins
to become willing to yield up its treasures, it lets go the easiest ones
first, and as one by one they are counted over to the Lord there comes a
final struggle; the dearest one of all is now before you. The emotions
of the heart begin to deepen as the affections cling to this treasure.
Everything has now centered upon this one object. It is to be sacrificed
for Jesus or he must be sacrificed for it. Which will it be? It must be
Jesus only. Much reasoning may arise upon this important matter, but all
is vain. There must be the yielding. You must say from the depths of
your soul, "Thy will be done." You have often said this before, but it
never meant nearly what it does now. You truly feel the agonies of
death. Were you to be laid on your death-bed or in your coffin, there
would be no greater separation from everything of this earth than this.
No loved one can now go with you. No treasure can be kept as your own.
The lone, dark vale must be crossed. No sympathy of friend can follow
you. Everything must be left behind. Dear reader, this is a critical
moment. The destiny of your soul is hanging upon a single thread. You
are swinging out over the deep precipice--clinging, clinging, clinging.
Jesus demands that you let go and drop completely into his will. You
desire to do this, but your soul shrinks. It seems so dark below. Many a
one has here taken counsel with his own soul and decided to swing back
upon the side of self, thereby losing incalculable wealth, and missing
this glorious soul-rest which "remaineth therefore ... for the people of
God." O dear soul, do not fail to labor to enter in! Let the death
struggle continue until it has completed its work--until you have truly
ceased from your own works. The floodgates of heaven are ready to open
and fill you with such glory that it will cause this old world to fade
out of sight; but not until you can cheerfully and willingly let go and
say to Jesus, "Thy will be done." Your Pentecost is just in reach. Will
you have it, or will you not?

In the dedication of the tabernacle we have a beautiful type of the
dedication of ourselves to this "reasonable service" of God. The
erection of the tabernacle, the placing of all the furniture, and the
arrangement of the entire structure had to be made in every respect
"according to the pattern" shown to Moses on the mount. In the
completion of all the work, we read in Ex. 40 that it was now all done
"as the Lord commanded Moses." He might have thought it did not matter
much about some of these things, and that the Lord would not require
every small thing to be done according to the pattern; but no matter
what he might have thought, he knew that obedience to every requirement
of the Lord was his only safety; so he made everything according to the
pattern. In verse 33 the record says, "So Moses finished the work."

Dear soul, can this be said of you? Have you finished the work? Have you
ceased from your own works? You must reach this point in your
consecration, so you can realize just as definitely as Moses did, that
you have truly finished the work. When this was the condition in the
dedication of the tabernacle, "a cloud covered the tent of the
congregation, and the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle. And Moses
was not able to enter into the tent of the congregation, because the
cloud abode thereon, and the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle."
V. 34. When Moses had finished the work and the dedication was complete,
the glory of the Lord came into the tabernacle. So it is with the
consecrated heart; the glory of the Lord will fill it.

In the dedication of the temple we also have a type of this Pentecostal
experience. "Solomon, and all the congregation of Israel that were
assembled unto him before the ark, sacrificed sheep and oxen, which
could not be told nor numbered for multitude."--2 Chron. 5:6. See the
sacrifice unto the Lord. Nothing was too great; everything was fully
yielded up to him without reserve. "And it came to pass, when the
priests were come out of the holy place: (for all the priests that were
present were sanctified, and did not then wait by course: also the
Levites which were the singers, all of them of Asaph, of Heman, of
Jeduthun, with their sons and their brethren, being arrayed in white
linen having cymbals and psalteries and harps, stood at the east end of
the altar, and with them an hundred and twenty priests sounding with
trumpets:) it came even to pass, as the trumpeters and singers were as
one, to make one sound to be heard in praising and thanking the Lord;
and when they lifted up their voice with the trumpets and cymbals and
instruments of musick, and praised the Lord, saying, For he is good; for
his mercy endureth forever: that then the house was filled with a cloud,
even the house of the Lord; so that the priests could not stand to
minister by reason of the cloud; for the glory of the Lord had filled
the house of God."--2 Chron. 5:11-14. Thus we see that when the
sacrifice was complete and everything was in perfect order, the glory of
God filled the temple.

This was but a type of the day of Pentecost at Jerusalem. In the type,
the glory of the Lord filled the consecrated temple. In the antitype,
the consecrated hearts (the temples of the Holy Ghost) were filled with
the glory of the Lord. Now this is just what Jesus will do with every
consecrated heart today. "He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and
with fire."--Matt. 3:11. But the consecration must be complete. It is
reasonable that Jesus should require us to yield up everything to him.
Our hearts cannot be purified until every affection is yielded. He
requires this for our own highest good. He wants the supreme right of
way so that he can work his own will in our entire being. He wants the
absolute control, so that he can get between us and everything. Praise
his name! this is for our benefit, which we will plainly see when once
we have paid the full price. When his will is completely wrought in us,
then he will with himself freely give us all things for our greatest
good and his highest glory. Even an hundredfold shall be our delightful
portion. But the loss of all things must precede this wonderful
increase. An absolute death must precede this abundant life. Then and
then only can the Holy Ghost come into and possess the temple. Oh, that
every professed believer in Jesus might see the importance of this
consecration! The suffering of death is serious indeed; but the
unspeakable glory that follows causes the enraptured soul to be
astonished at the marvelous gain for so small a loss. The perfect love
of Jesus now flows from his heart into the one which has yielded its all
to him. The undivided affections now feel the blessedness of perfect
unity with him--married indeed to him who is raised from the dead.




CHAPTER IV

The Holy Spirit of Promise


The Holy Spirit was promised through the prophets. "Until the spirit be
poured upon us from on high, and the wilderness be a fruitful field, and
the fruitful field be counted for a forest. Then judgment shall dwell in
the wilderness, and righteousness remain in the fruitful field. And the
work of righteousness shall be peace; and the effect of righteousness
quietness and assurance forever. And my people shall dwell in a
peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting
places."--Isa. 32:15-18.

"And I will give them one heart, and I will put a new spirit within
you; and I will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and will give
them a heart of flesh: that they may walk in my statutes, and keep mine
ordinances, and do them: and they shall be my people, and I will be
their God."--Ezek. 11:19, 20. "For I will pour water upon him that is
thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I will pour my spirit upon thy
seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring: and they shall spring up as
among the grass, as willows by the water courses."--Isa. 44:3, 4.

"Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean: from
all your filthiness, and from all your idols, will I cleanse you. A new
heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you: and
I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you
an heart of flesh. And I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to
walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them. And ye
shall dwell in the land that I gave to your fathers; and ye shall be my
people, and I will be your God."--Ezek. 36:25-28.

"And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my spirit
upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your
old men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see visions: and
also upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days will I pour
out my spirit."--Joel 2:28, 29.

=Promised through Christ.= "And, behold, I send the promise of my Father
upon you: but tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with
power from on high."--Luke 24:49. "But whosoever drinketh of the water
that I shall give him shall never thirst; but the water that I shall
give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting
life."--John 4:14. "He that believeth on me, as the scripture hath said,
out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. (But this spake he
of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive: for the
Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet
glorified.)"--John 7:38, 39.

"If ye love me, keep my commandments. And I will pray the Father, and he
shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you forever;
even the Spirit of truth; whom the world cannot receive, because it
seeth him not, neither knoweth him: but ye know him; for he dwelleth
with you, and shall be in you. At that day ye shall know that I am in my
Father, and ye in me, and I in you. But the Comforter, which is the Holy
Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all
things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said
unto you."--John 14:15-17, 20, 26. "But when the Comforter is come, whom
I will send you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which
proceedeth from the Father, he shall testify of me."--John 15:26.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Nevertheless I tell you the truth; It is expedient for you that I go
away: for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if
I depart, I will send him unto you. And when he is come, he will reprove
the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment: of sin, because
they believe not on me; of righteousness, because I go to my Father, and
ye see me no more; of judgment, because the prince of this world is
judged. I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them
now. Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you
into all truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he
shall hear, that shall he speak: and he will show you things to come. He
shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto
you. All things that the Father hath are mine: therefore said I, that he
shall take of mine, and shall show it unto you."--John 16:7-15. "John
truly baptized with water; but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost
not many days hence."--Acts 1:5.


A Fulfillment of This Promise

"And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one
accord in one place. And suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a
rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were
sitting. And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire,
and it sat upon each of them. And they were all filled with the Holy
Ghost."--Acts 2:1-4.


A Testimony of Its Fulfillment

"But this is that which was spoken by the prophet Joel; and it shall
come to pass in the last days, saith God, I will pour out of my Spirit
upon all flesh: and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and
your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams:
and on my servants and on my handmaidens I will pour out in those days
of my Spirit; and they shall prophesy.... This Jesus hath God raised up,
whereof we all are witnesses. Therefore being by the right hand of God
exalted, and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy
Ghost, he hath shed forth this, which ye now see and hear."--Acts
2:16-18, 32, 33.


To Whom Is This Promised?

"Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in
the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive
the gift of the Holy Ghost. For the promise is unto you, and to your
children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God
shall call."--Acts 2:38, 39.

"And we are his witnesses of these things; and so is also the Holy
Ghost, whom God hath given to them that obey him."--Acts 5:32. "That the
blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ;
that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith."--Gal.
3:14.

"That I should be the minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles,
ministering the gospel of God, that the offering up of the Gentiles
might be acceptable, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost."--Rom. 15:16.
"But we are bound to give thanks always to God for you, brethren beloved
of the Lord, because God hath from the beginning chosen you to salvation
through sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth."--2 Thess.
2:13.

In a previous chapter we have noticed that the Holy Ghost experience of
the apostles and all those of the early church was the same; and we see
definitely by the texts just quoted that it is the design of God that
all believers receive it. Also we have seen that this Holy Ghost
experience is a subsequent one to regeneration, and identical with
sanctification. Every young convert who has truly been regenerated, will
in due time find that something more needs to be done in his heart
before he can fully realize an experience that will correspond with the
fulfillment of the many exceeding great and precious promises of the
Holy Ghost.

The Scriptures clearly teach us that regeneration is a work of the Holy
Spirit. "For by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body."--1 Cor.
12:13. This does not have reference to the Pentecostal baptism, but to
the work of the Holy Spirit in regeneration, inducting us into the body
of Christ, the church. This is very different from the baptism with the
Holy Ghost. In regeneration the Holy Ghost baptizes the believer into
Christ; in sanctification Christ baptizes the believer with the Holy
Ghost. "He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire."--Matt.
3:11.

This latter is the sanctification and Pentecostal experience. Both are
spiritual experiences. When reading these wonderful promises by the
prophets, we can clearly distinguish the two works of grace foretold.

The birth of the Spirit (John 3:3-8), or that experience which inducts
us into Christ, must necessarily precede the experience of
sanctification. The Holy Ghost will never come into the temple to abide
until he has first gained possession of the same. The heart must first
be both justified and fully consecrated before the divine Guest can make
it his exclusive and permanent abode. This glorious grace of
sanctification does not detract from the marvelous work of
justification. Both have their import and place in God's wonderful
redemption plan, and stand out distinctly in many of the scriptures; and
yet we occasionally hear of some who say of this beautiful doctrine that
it is not taught in the word of God. Why such remarks are made is simply
because of a misconception of the glorious redemption plan--in some
instances it is owing to the perverted doctrines of men, while in others
it may be because of a perverted individual experience of justification.
To the willing and obedient heart, God will impart knowledge and
understanding of his sweet and glorious soul-rest.

Oh, let us praise and magnify the Lord for his wonderful grace that he
has so abundantly supplied through repentance toward God and faith
toward our Lord Jesus Christ, that he is so willing and ready to remove
from our hearts the guilt of all our sins and transgressions, and
remember them against us no more forever, and then bestow upon us this
blessed inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith that is in
Christ Jesus! Would that every justified believer might be kept from all
the perverted doctrines of men, so that the heart could receive the
knowledge of the pure word of God and become instructed in the doctrine
of the Holy Ghost life. The promise of the Father which the resurrected
Christ said he would send upon his justified disciples was no more a
promise for them than for every justified believer throughout the gospel
dispensation. Why then should any of us come short of entering into this
blessed covenant of an entire consecration and receiving the fulfillment
of the promise? Thank God it is for us and our children and to all that
are afar off.

Until the believer reaches this grace, he is not in his normal spiritual
condition, and cannot live the Christ-life in a manner that is perfectly
satisfactory to his own heart. The great need is a clean heart and the
indwelling Holy Spirit, without which there is not the power within at
all times to withstand every evil attack of the enemy with perfect
victory. Jesus knew this need in his disciples. Their usefulness in the
world could not be satisfactory until they received the fulfillment of
the promise. They had been useful in his hands and under his personal
guidance in the ministry of the gospel of the kingdom. They had already
by his help been able to bear fruit, but it was the will of the Father
that they should bear more fruit, through the power of the Spirit-filled
life; hence they were not to depart from Jerusalem until they were
endued with power from on high. "Ye shall receive power after that the
Holy Ghost is come upon you." How many of the dear people of God today
have never had their Pentecost! Some are out in the world preaching the
gospel with no deeper spiritual experience than that of the disciples
before they tarried at Jerusalem. Many have mistaken some natural
ability for the power of the Holy Ghost. Others have accepted the
doctrine of sanctification theoretically--made a formal consecration
and claimed the experience, but have never received the Holy Ghost.
Dearly beloved brethren and sisters, let us entreat you to tarry and do
not depart from your positive death bed consecration, until you are
endued with power from on high. It is the will of the Father that you
receive the Holy Spirit to possess your being--the consecrated
temple--and make your life from this moment a reproduction of the life
of Jesus. He is not here now as he was during his earthly ministry, but
the Father has designed that the Holy Spirit should dwell in the hearts
of consecrated men and women who shall go forth into the world and be
witnesses unto Jesus--representatives that will live the Christ-life in
this world, so that men may plainly see his character and fruits in us.
When Jesus ascended to the throne, he by no means intended that his
people should be left comfortless, or deprived of his presence; but
rather, he said, "It is expedient for you that I go away."

The "Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost," is the divine executive of
Jesus. He was the power and life in Jesus when here in his redemption
work, and when he ascended to his throne in heaven the Holy Ghost
descended to earth to carry on this glorious redemption work to the end
of the world. But he must have human instrumentality through which to
work. Where he can find a truly consecrated temple, there he makes his
abode, and taking full control of the entire being, performs the perfect
will of God through this instrumentality. This is why the apostles were
so much more useful after Pentecost than before. They were now fully
possessed by the Holy Ghost, and in, through faith in, the name of Jesus
were enabled to shake the world. Jesus has left his name here on earth.
Through it the Holy Spirit now effects this great redemption. He cannot
do this by himself. He cannot "reprove the world of sin, of
righteousness, and of judgment," only as he can find consecrated hearts
on earth in which to abide. The Spirit-filled lives of the people are
the only factors that can be used in the hand of God to produce
apostolic results in these perilous days in which we live. This final
reformation was unquestionably begun by the power of the Holy Spirit,
and will never be completed by any other power. It is a spiritual work,
and only as the glorious doctrine of sanctification is taught and the
experience obtained and retained, will the church reach the apostolic
plane.




CHAPTER V.

Our Inheritance


"And now, brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace,
which is able to build you up, and give you an inheritance among all
them which are sanctified."--Acts 20:32. "And inheritance among them
which are sanctified by faith that is in me."--Acts 26:18. "For this is
the will of God, even your sanctification."--1 Thess. 4:3.

"That ye be not slothful, but followers of them who through faith and
patience inherit the promises. For when God made promise to Abraham,
because he could swear by no greater, he sware by himself, saying,
Surely blessing I will bless thee, and multiplying I will multiply thee.
And so after he had patiently endured, he obtained the promise. For men
verily swear by the greater: and an oath for confirmation is to them an
end of all strife. Wherein God, willing more abundantly to show unto the
heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an
oath: that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God
to lie, we might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to
lay hold upon the hope set before us: which hope we have as an anchor of
the soul, both sure and steadfast, and which entereth into that within
the veil."--Heb. 6:12-19.

"But into the second went the high priest alone once every year, not
without blood, which he offered for himself, and for the errors of the
people: the Holy Ghost this signifying, that the way into the holiest of
all was not yet made manifest, while as the first tabernacle was yet
standing: which was a figure for the time then present, in which were
offered both gifts and sacrifices, that could not make him that did the
service perfect, as pertaining to the conscience; which stood only in
meats and drinks, and divers washings and carnal ordinances, imposed on
them until the time of reformation. But Christ being come an high
priest of good things to come, by a greater and more perfect tabernacle,
not made with hands, that is to say, not of this building; neither by
the blood of goats and calves, but by his own blood he entered in once
into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us. For if
the blood of bulls and of goats, and the ashes of a heifer sprinkling
the unclean, sanctifieth to the purifying of the flesh; how much more
shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered
himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works to
serve the living God? And for this cause he is the mediator of the new
testament, that by means of death, for the redemption of transgressions
that were under the first testament, they which are called might receive
the promise of eternal inheritance."--Heb. 9:7-15.

"Wherefore when he cometh into the world, he saith, Sacrifice and
offering thou wouldest not, but a body hast thou prepared me: ... Above
when he said, Sacrifice and offering and burnt offerings and offering
for sin thou wouldest not, neither hadst pleasure therein which are
offered by the law; then said he, Lo, I come to do thy will, O God. He
taketh away the first, that he may establish the second. By the which
will we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ
once for all ... For by one offering he hath perfected for ever them
that are sanctified."--Heb. 10:5, 8-10, 14.

"Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved the church, and
gave himself for it; that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the
washing of water by the word, that he might present it to himself a
glorious church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing: but
that it should be holy and without blemish."--Eph. 5:25-27.

"In whom also we have obtained an inheritance, being predestinated
according to the purpose of him who worketh all things after the counsel
of his own will: ... in whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard the
word of truth, the gospel of your salvation; in whom also after that ye
believed ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of promise, which is the
earnest of our inheritance until the redemption of the purchased
possession, unto the praise of his glory."

"Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works."--Tit.
2:14. "To perform the mercy promised to our fathers, and to remember his
holy covenant; the oath which he sware to our father Abraham, that he
would grant unto us, that we being delivered out of the hand of our
enemies, might serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness
before him, all the days of our life."--Luke 1:72-75.

"Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He saith not, And
to seeds as of many; but as of one, And to thy seed, which is Christ ...
For if the inheritance be of the law, it is no more of promise but God
gave it to Abraham by promise." "That the blessing of Abraham might come
on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ, that we might receive the promise
of the Spirit through faith." "And if ye be Christ's, then are ye
Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise."--Gal. 3:16, 18, 14,
29.

The Abrahamic covenant embraced a twofold nature: the promised seed, and
the promised land. Isaac was the literal fulfillment of the promised
seed; Canaan, the literal fulfillment of the promised land. These were
but the foreshadowing of their great and glorious antitype, Christ and
the gospel, which are the spiritual fulfillment of the promises made to
Abraham.

"And in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed," which
blessing begins in the regenerate heart, is perfected in the inheritance
of entire sanctification, and consummated in that inheritance "reserved
in heaven for us." That part which is yet reserved in heaven for us will
be realized in due time, when this mortal shall put on immortality and
the redemption of Christ shall be completed for spirit, soul, and body.
We can all rejoice in this "blessed hope" which shall be fully realized
when Jesus the resurrected Redeemer shall come again and fashion our
dying bodies like unto his glorious body. But the object of this chapter
is to point out the scriptures which teach us the blessed truth of the
present-tense gospel inheritance, which in the redemption plan is to be
realized by the people of God in this gospel dispensation, on this side
of the second coming of Christ.

The blessed grace of entire sanctification is scripturally the bequest
of God to his people. It is not simply the will of God in the sense that
he desires us to have this experience, but it is truly a blood-bought
inheritance, provided and willed by our Father through Jesus Christ to
every child of God. This blessed experience of regeneration, or the
divine birth, inducts us into the family of God, making us a scriptural
heir to all the good things of Father's possessions. Father has
perfected every necessary provision for every one of his children to
come into immediate possession of this inheritance. A will or testament
must specify the nature of the inheritance, mention distinctly the names
of the heirs, must have the signature of the testator affixed in the
presence of witnesses, should appoint an executor, and in every respect
it must be perfect or it will not stand legally. Scripturally, this is
equally as true. The New Testament is the will, which distinctly
specifies the nature of the inheritance of the people of God "among them
which are sanctified." The sanctified have entered into their
possessions of this Holy Ghost Canaan, and now every regenerated child
of God who knows his name is written in Father's family record--the Book
of life--soon finds by reading the will that this inheritance is for
him. He knows it as he reads and believes, and more and more the Holy
Spirit leads him to meet all the spiritual conditions requisite to the
coming into possession of this inheritance. He sees also in the will,
the signature of the testator. He sees that the Father has authorized
Jesus Christ to make this will of force. Legally, a will is not of force
until after the death of the testator. Scripturally, this is equally a
fact. The child of God sees that it requires the death of the testator
to make it possible that he could be sanctified. He reads in the will
that Jesus, the testator, suffered without the gate that he might
sanctify his people with his own blood and that this is the will of God,
even your sanctification.

We see in the will that Father has given every necessary instruction to
enable us to meet every condition of entrance into this blessed
possession. His word teaches us that as Abraham with faith and patience
obtained the promise, so we should profit by his example. God has shown
us through his covenant with Abraham that what he promises he is ready
and able to fulfill. He has shown his people, who are the heirs of this
inheritance, the immutability of his counsel by his word and by his
oath, that it is impossible for him to break his word and that we should
come to him with perfect confidence that he will do just what he has
promised.

There is a remarkable certainty in the fulfillment of this wonderful
will. It is as far above any earthly will or testament as the heavens
are higher than the earth. In an earthly will made by man, the very
incident that makes the will of force also makes it liable to become
annulled; for after the death of the testator there frequently is found
a defect in the will, also there are instances where the heirs,
dissatisfied with their portion of the inheritance, proceed by legal
process to annul the entire will and have a new one made according to
their own desires. But no such objections can possibly be brought
against this divine will.

There are three reasons why it is absolutely beyond the power of man or
principality to overthrow this will.

1. It is positively without fault. God had made a will, the old
testament, which was defective. The apostle says, "For if that first
covenant had been faultless, then should no place have been sought for
the second."--Heb. 8:7. In the preceding verse he says, "But now hath he
obtained a more excellent ministry, by how much also he is the mediator
of a better covenant [testament or will], which was established upon
better promises." The blood of those animals in the old covenant was
acceptable under that dispensation, but it could not produce the desired
effect in sanctification. It could only sanctify to the purifying of the
flesh; could not reach the spiritual and moral nature of man; for there
was no spiritual nor moral nature in the sacrifice. It was only a
sacrifice of animal life; therefore it could only purify the flesh, or
animal life, of man (Heb. 9:13) in a ceremonial sense. Therefore, the
first will or testament was necessarily defective, and God himself has
annulled it. Heb. 8:13. But Father's last will is vastly different. It
is complete, perfect, and utterly without fault.

2. It is so divinely and infinitely perfect in its power to sanctify and
reach every inmost need of the heart that none of the heirs can possibly
become dissatisfied with their individual portion; for this portion is
the entire inheritance for each individual heir. It is not divided into
certain bounded portions for different heirs, but each is entitled to
the entire inheritance, and can come into the full enjoyment of the
whole possession without diminishing, in the least degree, the privilege
of every heir to enjoy the same. This makes it unspeakably satisfactory.
But what yet adds to it in its power to satisfy, is that, the sacrifice
which was required to bring this will and testament into force was the
precious blood of Christ. The great purpose of God in this judicial
sacrifice was that the sins of the world might be forgiven, that we
might thus become the sons of God and heirs of this inheritance. But, my
dear brother and sister, our Saviour had also another purpose in view in
this stupendous sacrifice. He gave himself for the church, that he might
sanctify and cleanse it. Eph. 5:25, 26 and Heb. 13:12.

Ah, dear reader, do you not see your inheritance in this? His blood can
sanctify wholly our spiritual, moral and physical nature. The blood of
the old will had no spiritual nor moral power in it at all; therefore,
no wonder it could sanctify only to the purifying of the flesh. But, oh,
the matchless, marvelous grace of God to prepare a sacrifice (a
body--Heb. 10:5) pure and spotless spiritually, morally, and physically,
which blood can cleanse our corresponding nature spiritually, morally,
and physically, and reaching every spot of our entire being, make us
clean from the least and last remains of sin. In comparing these
sacrifices no wonder the apostle asks, "How much more shall the blood of
Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to
God, purge your conscience from dead works to serve the living God?"
Truly, when we have obtained this inheritance we can sing with the
inspired poet

     "I have found it, Lord, in thee,
        An everlasting store,
      Of comfort, joy, and bliss to me,
        How can I wish for more?"

Praise God for the cleansing which reaches our inmost soul and saves to
the uttermost! It, therefore, readers, is impossible for the heir to
become dissatisfied with the inheritance.

3. To make the inheritance doubly certain, we have already seen that God
has confirmed it by two immutable things; his word, and his oath; but to
add still more to this matter and make it absolutely certain and
impossible for any principality or power to overthrow this will, God has
appointed Jesus Christ to be executor of his own will. From a human
standpoint this would be impossible; for the will could not be of force
at all while the testator was alive, and his death would render him
incapable of any part in it as an executor. But with God these things
are possible; for when the testator died that he might bring this will
into force, he could not be holden by the power of death; but arose
again from the dead, that he might lead captivity captive and give gifts
unto men. Thus he has become the executor of his own will, and now
stands ready to bestow upon every heir the full possession of his
inheritance.

Dear reader, this is the glorious land of promise of which the land of
Canaan was but a type. The children of Israel were the heirs of that
land because they were the children of Abraham. We are heirs to this
Holy Ghost Canaan because we are the children of God through Christ.
This Holy Spirit life can only be obtained through this God-appointed
plan. It is the "inheritance among them which are sanctified." God gave
it to Abraham by promise, and as his faith grasped hold on the promises
he saw beyond the literal seed into the blessings of the gospel of
Christ and this glorious Holy Spirit life. Christ has fulfilled these
promises which Abraham saw and believed; and now the apostle can truly
say in looking over this wonderful plan, that "they which be of faith
are blessed with faithful Abraham. That the blessing of Abraham might
come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ; that we might receive the
promise of the Spirit through faith."--Gal. 3:9, 14.




CHAPTER VI.

Sanctified by Faith


"But without faith it is impossible to please him: for he that cometh to
God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him."--Heb. 11:6.

"That they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them
which are sanctified by faith that is in me."--Acts 26:18.

"Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our
Lord Jesus Christ: by whom also we have access by faith into this grace
wherein we stand."--Rom. 5:1, 2.

Faith in the blood of Christ. "Wherefore Jesus also, that he might
sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without the
gate."--Heb. 13:12. "But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light,
we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his
Son cleanseth us from all sin."--1 John 1:7.

Dead to sin by faith. "Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with
him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should
not serve sin. For he that is dead is freed from sin ... Likewise reckon
ye also yourselves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God
through Jesus Christ our Lord."--Rom. 6:6, 7, 11.

Free from sin by faith. "Being then made free from sin, ye became the
servants of righteousness ... For as ye have yielded your members
servants to uncleanness and to iniquity unto iniquity; even so now yield
your members servants to righteousness unto holiness ... But now being
made free from sin, and become servants to God, ye have your fruit unto
holiness, and the end everlasting life."--Rom. 6:18-22. "Jesus answered
them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whosoever committeth sin is the
servant of sin. And the servant abideth not in the house for ever: but
the Son abideth ever. If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall
be free indeed."--John 8:34-36.

"And ye know that he was manifested to take away our sins; and in him is
no sin. Whosoever abideth in him sinneth not: whosoever sinneth hath
not seen him, neither known him.... He that committeth sin is of the
devil; for the devil sinneth from the beginning. For this purpose the
Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil.
Whosoever is born of God doth not commit sin; for his seed remaineth in
him: and he cannot sin, because he is born of God. In this the children
of God are manifest, and the children of the devil."--1 John 3:5-10.

A pure heart by faith. "And God, which knoweth the hearts, bare them
witness, giving them the Holy Ghost, even as he did unto us; and put no
difference between us and them, purifying their hearts by faith."--Acts
15:8, 9.

We receive the Holy Spirit by faith. "That the blessing of Abraham might
come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ: that we might receive the
promise of the Spirit through faith."--Gal. 3:14. "That I should be the
minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, ministering the gospel of God,
that the offering up of the Gentiles might be acceptable, being
sanctified by the Holy Ghost."--Rom. 15:16. "If ye then, being evil
[earthly], know how to give good gifts unto your children: how much more
shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask
him?"--Luke 11:13.

Sanctification is a redemption blessing offered to us upon specified
conditions. The natural and general blessings of God toward men, such as
the sunshine, rain, and all other temporal or earthly blessings, may be
received alike by both saint and sinner, who come into conformity with
the natural laws by which these natural blessings are governed. Every
redemption or spiritual blessing is also governed by divinely fixed
laws, which if complied with will invariably bring to us all that is
contained in the promise. God is able to bestow upon us these blessings
unconditionally if this should be his sovereign will in some individual
instances; but according to his redemption plan there is no assurance
given to anyone for any of these specified blessings without a strict
conformity to divine law. The word of God plainly sets forth the laws
upon which these different redemption blessings are based. Repentance
and faith are the laws of justification. It is a divinely established
fact that God cannot lie. He has forever settled his word in heaven and
also upon earth; therefore, it is impossible that any sinner should
comply with the laws of repentance and faith and not be justified.
Consecration and faith are the laws of sanctification, which if complied
with, must necessarily bring us into this glorious soul-rest.

We have considered the law of consecration as a condition of
sanctification in a previous chapter; and from the quoted texts in this
chapter we will now briefly consider the law of faith. These laws are
definitely fixed, and must as definitely be complied with. A definite
consecration and a definite faith will produce a definite experience.
One great lack in the church today is a lack of definiteness. The
doctrine of sanctification must be more definitely taught by God's
anointed ministry, who have themselves definitely met the conditions,
both to obtain and retain this definite experience. When it is
definitely taught it will consequently be definitely sought and
obtained.

In the apostle's commission we distinctly see that we are sanctified by
faith. Acts 26:18. We also see that Jesus suffered on the cross that he
might sanctify us with his own blood. This points us to the fact that we
must have faith in his blood. This grace is purchased for us, and now it
is for us to receive it. We also see that he has made provision in this
same purchase that we may be kept sanctified. This is upon the simple
condition of walking in the light as he is in the light. The result of
which is: his blood cleanseth us from all sin. These precious truths
will do us no good if we do not believe them. No heart can ever receive
the benefits of this inestimable purchase without faith. Faith is the
hand that reaches out and takes it. Jesus can do no more than he has
done to bring it to us. He holds it out to us, all perfect and complete,
and as we meet the conditions of consecration and faith it becomes ours.

The apostle teaches us in Rom. 6:11 to reckon ourselves "dead indeed
unto sin." This can be done only by faith. The reckoning of faith is a
very simple process; it is just believing God. Abraham believed God,
simply reckoned that what God said was true, and then God counted
something to Abraham. He counted it to him for righteousness.

This is the divine law of faith. When we believe it is so because God
says it, then God makes it so because we believe it. This law applies to
all the graces of the gospel alike. It is a sad fact that some
professing Christians do not believe we can be sanctified in this life.
Now, it is utterly impossible for such people to get it. They do not
believe. The blood of Christ cannot sanctify them in this condition. It
is not for them at all. It is only for them that believe, and of course
no one can believe for it in the scriptural sense without having met the
condition of scriptural consecration. Then the scriptural reckoning will
bring the scriptural and satisfactory result.

Let us illustrate with a simple mathematical reckoning. In a case of
addition we take two numbers and reckon them together before we get the
sum. It can never be obtained any other way. The two numbers are
entirely distinct and separate from each other until they are reckoned
together. It is the reckoning that produces the sum. This is exactly
true in the process of faith. The justified believer comes to God for
his inheritance of sanctification. He makes the absolute and definite
consecration. He sees that the blood of Jesus has been shed that he may
be sanctified. This is Jesus' part. The consecration is the believer's
part. There are the two separate parts which, if they are not reckoned
together, will never produce the result. We might say that we have now
made the consecration, and can do no more. This would be a mistake, we
can do more: we have not yet done the reckoning. We can take the two
parts, the blood of Jesus and our consecration, and by faith add them
together, and according to the immutable law of God, which is the law of
faith, the sum of the reckoning is, our sanctification. This is the
scriptural method of obtaining this experience; and as we from
henceforth reckon ourselves dead indeed unto sin upon the condition of
an absolute, unbroken consecration, we may rest assured that the blood
of Jesus keeps us cleansed from all sin. The fact that some one may say
he does not believe we can be kept free from sin, by no means affects
this divine law. It is as true as heaven, despite all the unbelief of
men. Oh, the power of the sin-cleansing blood! Can we not say with deep,
heartfelt reality,

     "Hallelujah for the cleansing;
      It has reached my inmost soul"?

Truly it is the sweet soul-rest, the heavenly Canaan of the soul, which
is the inheritance of the people of God.

The apostle Peter, in his testimony of the inwrought grace of God at
Pentecost, speaks of this law of faith, which effected in him and his
brethren at Jerusalem, as well as the household of Cornelius upon the
event of their induction into this glorious grace, the experience of
heart purity, "and put no difference between us and them, purifying
their hearts by faith." This is one phase of sanctification, and
according to the testimony of Peter, was a part of the pentecostal
experience. The other phase of it is, in the previous verse of this
testimony, "giving them the Holy Ghost, even as he did unto us." This is
explained by the apostle Paul. "That we might receive the promise of the
Spirit through faith."--Gal. 3:14. Now if we turn to Rom. 15:16, again
we see that we are "sanctified by the Holy Ghost." Certainly it could
not be made more plain than these scriptures set it forth. We receive
the pure heart and the Holy Spirit by faith, which experience is
scripturally termed sanctification; therefore, we can understand the
language of Jesus in that part of the commission of the apostle already
quoted: "and inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith that
is in me."

Dear brother and sister, let us magnify God and the name of Jesus for
our inheritance, and if there should be one reader who has not yet
entered into this promised land, let us go over at once and possess it.

We see a beautiful example of faith in the experience of the children of
Abraham crossing the Jordan to enter into their literal inheritance. The
priests that bore the ark, which went before the people, were to be the
first to go down into the stream, which, God had said, should be
divided, and the people should go over into their inheritance. As they
came down to the river, their feet were dipped into the stream before
the waters parted. God had promised it. They believed it and obeyed
accordingly, and God fulfilled his promise; the waters were parted, and
they all passed over. How different this was from those who, forty
years previous to this event had been brought by the hand of God to
Kadesh Barnea, who had all the promises of God in their favor, that he
would cause them to go in and possess the land. But because of unbelief
they were sent back into the wilderness, to wander and die. This literal
Canaan was their promised land, their land of rest, their very own; God
had promised Abraham that it should be possessed by his seed. But these
forfeited it because of unbelief. This was the type of this spiritual
inheritance of sanctification, our land of rest, our very own, which we,
the spiritual seed of Abraham through faith in Christ, are to go into
and possess.

The apostle gives us some wholesome admonition upon the importance of
seeking to enter in. "Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you
an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God."--Heb. 3:4.
An evil heart of unbelief will most certainly cause us to lose our
inheritance. We are made partakers of it only by faith. As certainly as
the unbelief of literal children of Abraham caused them to be rejected
and disinherited, so will unbelief cause the same sad result in losing
the spiritual inheritance. They provoked God with their unbelief, and he
who had sworn to Abraham that his seed should possess Canaan, now sware
that these unbelieving ones should not enter in. They could not enter in
because of unbelief. God's word was not broken, however; for he brought
into this land those of the children who, their unbelieving fathers
said, would become a prey to the inhabitants of the land. And, what
still keeps God's word from being broken is, that he has opened to us
this glorious spiritual land, and tells us to go over and possess it.
Dear brother, are you at Kadesh Barnea today, and afraid of the giants?
God has given the land to us. The message of reproof comes to you with
this solemn and important question, "How long are ye slack to go to
possess the land which the Lord God of your fathers hath given you?"

This gospel of sanctification is preached to us today as the gospel of
literal Canaan was preached to those descendants of Abraham in that day.
It did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard
it. The apostle says, "We which have believed do enter into rest," but
more must enter in. God's promise to Abraham must yet be more completely
fulfilled. The question is simply left with us, Will we enter in or will
we not? If we will not, then the inheritance will be given to others,
and we will lose the blessed soul-rest that is provided in this
redemption for the people of God. In his exhortation to us, the apostle
says "Let us labor therefore to enter into that rest, lest any man fall
after the same example of unbelief."

     "Oh, this blessed holy rest,
      On my Jesus' loving breast.
      Oh, the sweetness and completeness
      Of perfected holiness."




CHAPTER VII

The Subtraction Process


The baptism with the Holy Ghost and fire, the entering into the heavenly
inheritance of Canaan, and the possession of the land, and all the
blessings that follow are unmistakably a process of addition to the
already blessed experience of the justified soul. This addition is
scripturally termed "sanctification." No mortal language can ever
express how much of an addition it is; but there must necessarily
precede this marvelous grace, a definite and absolute subtraction, a
loss of all things for the excellency of Christ, a complete
self-abnegation, which has been mentioned in a previous chapter upon
consecration. Until this absolute loss of all things has been truly
experienced, there cannot be obtained the gain of this additional
experience. We cannot lay hold of the promised inheritance until we
completely let go of everything else that has been called our own.

There is, within our spiritual, moral, and physical nature, a depravity,
"our old man," which must be extracted before we can possess the purity
of heart so plainly taught in the word of God. This depravity is so
deeply embedded in, and interwoven into, our affections and nature,
that, like a closely fitting garment, it seems a part of us; and were
it not for the plain teachings of the word of God, and the power of the
all-cleansing blood of Christ which can reach the inmost center of our
nature, purging out all unnatural tendencies and unholy tempers, the
justified believer might conclude that this inborn depravity must be
permitted to exist and remain with us all through life. But thank God!
there is a remedy in this great redemption plan. The heart can be
purified and become a holy temple for the indwelling of the Holy Ghost.
This depends upon the plainly specified conditions taught in the word of
God. He will prepare the temple for his abode if we but furnish him an
absolute consecration of the temple. This is our part in this
preparatory stage of the work of sanctification. In order that he may
purify our nature, we must yield up to him everything that is to be
purified. This process involves the loss of all things; for when the
heart is thus yielded, everything that it clings to is also yielded, and
then, and only then, can the blood of Christ be applied for a perfect
cleansing. This is where the subtraction work is effected, where every
vestige of depravity is removed from the heart; because it has for this
purpose yielded to Jesus. The following scripture sets forth this
experience.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of
sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin."--Rom.
6:6. It cannot be improved upon nor cultivated. It is sinful in nature,
and must be dealt with according to the redemption law of crucifixion.
It is condemned and must die. It is utterly worthless to God, and
harmful to man; therefore, it must die. It clings to life with
remarkable tenacity, and it is not within the power of man alone to put
it to death. It has so entwined itself into our affections that they and
each of their objects must be absolutely yielded up to death, even the
most sacred treasures of the heart; so that the true work of purity may
be perfectly wrought within us. To simply yield up our old man for his
destruction would be but a pleasant sacrifice; for every justified
believer who has obtained the knowledge of this enemy within becomes
anxious for his destruction. It is not the yielding up of our old man,
therefore, that seems such a loss to us; but when we see that our whole
being, spirit, soul, and body, with every affection and its object, must
be yielded up and truly laid upon the altar, we realize the subtraction
process of sanctification--the loss of all things. Our old man cannot be
crucified until everything is thus first yielded up. As long as any one
object of our affection is withheld, the consecration is incomplete and
the affections can not be purified from this depravity; hence the
necessity of an absolute yielding up of everything, to obtain the
excellency of this heavenly grace. In this condition we can assuredly
experience the meaning of the words: "Knowing this, that our old man is
crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed." Thank God!
this is a present-tense experience for everyone who is willing to be
conformed to the perfect will of God. In this condition, Jesus can have
the perfect right of way within, and work in us that which is
well-pleasing in his sight.

Some one might wonder if we are never permitted in this truly
consecrated condition, to set our affections upon anything in this
world, or, if we can possess anything as our own, if all must be yielded
up and laid upon the altar. If our affections and every object of the
same are yielded to Jesus, then we certainly cannot have them placed
upon anything else. This is one of the grand provisions of his grace.
Jesus now gets between us and every object of our affections. He not
only has our affections, but he has the objects of our affections. In
the consciousness of this loss to us we also become conscious of the
loss of our old, depraved nature, and the gain of a glorious, heavenly
purity which we before did not possess. But above all things, we become
conscious of the fact that Jesus has become enthroned within our hearts,
and now has full control of our entire being. In him we possess all
things. He gives us back, with himself, everything that is good for us:
father, mother, brother, sister, and every God-given blessing that we
had yielded up to him. But they do not seem to us now like they did
before. There is something between us and them. What is it? It is Jesus!
This makes every blessing so much more precious to us now. A sacredness
exists between us and our loved ones which we never realized before.
They now get our love only as they get it through Jesus, for he is
between us and them. Praise God for this precious experience! We gave
everything, our all, for him. He purified our hearts and now gives
everything, his all, to us. Without the subtraction of our all, first,
we cannot obtain the addition, his all. Thus, after all, we lose nothing
but the depravity of our nature, which loss, of course, involves the
loss of all things for the time being, but means the gain of all things
in the fullness of Christ.

The apostle Paul expresses this crucifixion in his testimony in Gal.
2:20 "I am crucified with Christ: nevertheless I live; yet not I, but
Christ liveth in me: and the life which I now live in the flesh I live
by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me."
There was something of the apostle that was crucified. It was the same
as he speaks of in Rom. 6:6, "our old man." That depraved, carnal self,
the proud, haughty Pharisee, the great Saul of Tarsus who considered
himself of such importance among men. This was the =I= that was
crucified; but there was an =I= who still lived. This was the humble,
sanctified Paul, the servant of Jesus Christ, who now considered himself
less than the least of all saints, and not worthy to be called an
apostle. What a contrast between the two =I='s. The one, the big =I=;
the other, the little =I=. They are exactly of opposite natures. The one
was Paul's "old man," the other his humble individual self. Jesus and
the big I cannot rule together in the same heart.

How many there are today who have not reached the death experience. They
have had their sins forgiven and realize that they are the children of
God; but they cannot say that they are crucified with Christ, in the
sense of the actual death of their old man. How many there are who are
conscious of this inward foe, and yet are taught that it can never
become dislodged from their nature and crucified. Praise God! he has
provided a remedy in the blood of Christ. By faith in this blood the
consecrated believer can receive the cleansing. The depraved nature is
crucified, and Christ now takes supreme control of the holy temple.

The language of the apostle in Gal. 6:14 also expresses the same
experience: "But God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of
our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I
unto the world." The blood of the cross has destroyed that inward nature
which was the point of contact with the world. As long as this exists
within, the world has a strong claim upon us, which, so long as it
exists within us, will assert its nature, and, if permitted, will
communicate with the world, and cause defeat in our Christian life, so
that we cannot conscientiously say we are dead to the world: for there
is something within us yet that is actually alive in this respect. This
is the point of inward contact with the world, which, when brought into
crucifixion, changes our inward condition and enables us to truly say
with the apostle, that the world is crucified unto us and we unto the
world, by the blood of the cross of Christ, and the life we now live in
this mortal body, which is the temple of the Holy Ghost, we live by the
faith of the Son of God, who has all power to keep us in the divine law
of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, which makes and keeps us free
from the law of sin and death.

In Matt. 15:13 we have this same doctrine of cleansing expressed in the
words of Jesus: "Every plant, which my heavenly Father hath not planted,
shall be rooted up." While it is true that Jesus was speaking of the
doctrines of the Pharisees in this instance, we can see beyond the
simple doctrines and traditions of men, which are but the outgrowth of
this root of depravity which our heavenly Father never planted in the
nature of man. The depraved heart is the fertile soil which
spontaneously grows all these evil things which Jesus mentions in this
parable. The root is there, and so long as it remains, there cannot be a
satisfactory Christian life. But the heavenly decree has been uttered by
the Redeemer himself, that this plant shall be rooted up, which rooting
up can be testified to by thousands of blood-washed saints today. Many
plain scriptures teach us that this experience of heart purity was a
recognized fact in the apostolic days. Jesus taught that it was
attainable and told of its blessings when in Matt. 5:8 he speaks of the
pure in heart. John writes: "And every man that hath this hope in him
purifieth himself, even as he is pure." Paul says that "the end of the
commandment is charity out of a pure heart" (1 Tim. 1:5), and in the
same letter he writes: "Holding the mystery of the faith in a pure
conscience."--Chap. 3:9. Also in Chap. 4:12, he writes: "Let no man
despise thy youth: but be thou an example of the believers, in word, in
conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity." In Chap.
5:22, he says, "Keep thyself pure." In 2 Tim. 2:22 we are taught that
many of the saints had this experience of cleansing: "Flee also youthful
lusts; but follow righteousness, faith, charity, peace, with them that
call on the Lord out of a pure heart."

The prophet Malachi saw the glorious fullness of this gospel salvation
as he beheld and spake by the Spirit: "And he shall sit as a refiner and
purifier of silver and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them
as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in
righteousness."--Mal. 3:3.

All these plain texts set forth the doctrines of cleansing beyond
question. Then when Peter takes the witness-stand (Acts 15:9) and
testifies that he and all the one hundred twenty at Pentecost, and
afterward the household of Cornelius, received the cleansing at the time
of the outpouring upon them of the Holy Spirit, we must acknowledge that
God certainly is no respecter of persons, and has the same measure of
grace for his people in this evening time of the gospel day. Praise his
holy name! Let us magnify and exalt the power of the all-cleansing
blood, for it can reach beyond the inmost depths of our fallen nature
and wash us whiter than snow. "For if the blood of bulls and of goats,
and the ashes of a heifer, sprinkling the unclean, sanctifieth to the
purifying of the flesh: how much more shall the blood of Christ, who
through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge
your conscience from dead works to serve the living God?"--

     "Oh, now I see the cleansing wave,
         That fountain deep and wide;
      Jesus, my Lord, mighty to save,
         Points to his wounded side.

     "The cleansing stream, I see, I see,
         I plunge, and oh, it cleanseth me
      Oh, praise the Lord, it cleanseth me!
         It cleanseth me, yes, cleanseth me."




CHAPTER VIII

Christian Perfection


Definition of =perfection=: Unblemished, blameless, pure.

We are commanded to be perfect. "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your
Father which is in heaven is perfect."--Matt. 5:48. "For we are glad,
when we are weak, and ye are strong: and this also we wish, even your
perfection. Finally, brethren, farewell. Be perfect, be of good comfort,
be of one mind, live in peace; and the God of love and peace shall be
with you."--2 Cor. 13:9, 11. "Therefore leaving the principles of the
doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto perfection."--Heb. 6:1.

We must be perfect in love. "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with
all thy mind; and thy neighbor as thyself."--Luke 10:27. "And above all
these things put on charity, which is the bond of perfectness."--Col.
3:14. "But whoso keepeth his word, in him verily is the love of God
perfected: hereby know we that we are in him."--1 John 2:5. "If we love
one another, God dwelleth in us, and his love is perfected in us....
Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of
judgment: because as he is, so are we in this world."--1 John 4:12, 17.

Perfect in unity. "For both he that sanctifieth and they who are
sanctified are all of one: for which cause he is not ashamed to call
them brethren."--Heb. 2:11. "And for their sakes I sanctify myself, that
they also might be sanctified through the truth. Neither pray I for
these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their
word: that they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in
thee, that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that
thou hast sent me. And the glory which thou gavest me I have given them;
that they may be one, even as we are one: I in them, and thou in me,
that they may be made perfect in one; and that the world may know that
thou hast sent me, and hast loved them, as thou hast loved me."--John
17:19-23.

Perfect in Christ. "Whom we preach, warning every man, and teaching
every man in all wisdom; that we may present every man perfect in Christ
Jesus." "And ye are complete in him, which is the head of all
principality and power." "Epaphras, who is one of you, a servant of
Christ, saluteth you, always laboring fervently for you in prayers, that
ye may stand perfect and complete in all the will of God."--Col. 1:28;
2:10; 4:12.

Perfect in purity. "Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not
yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we
shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is. And every man that
hath this hope in him purifieth himself even as he is pure."--1 John
3:2, 3. "Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse
ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting
holiness in the fear of God."--2 Cor. 7:1. "And the Lord make you to
increase and abound in love one toward another, and toward all men, even
as we do toward you: to the end he may stablish your hearts unblameable
in holiness before God, even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ with all his saints."--1 Thess. 3:12, 13.

This perfection is attainable. "Till we all come in the unity of the
faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto
the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ."--Eph. 4:13. "Let
us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded: and if in anything
ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you."--Phil.
3:15. "For by one offering he hath perfected forever them that are
sanctified."--Heb. 10:14. "For the law made nothing perfect, but the
bringing in of a better hope did; by the which we draw nigh unto
God."--Heb. 7:19. "Which was a figure for the time then present, in
which were offered both gifts and sacrifices, that could not make him
that did the service perfect, as pertaining to the conscience."--Heb.
9:9.

A perfection not attainable in this life. "Not as though I had already
attained, either were already perfect: but I follow after, if that I may
apprehend that for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus."

Christian perfection is not maturity in wisdom, grace, or knowledge. "Ye
therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware lest ye
also, being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own
steadfastness. But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ."--2 Pet. 3:17, 18.

Christian perfection is looked upon by some as an impossibility in this
life; but when we turn to the word of God and see the many plain texts
upon the subject, it must become evident to every candid mind that it is
in the plan of redemption that every child of God should attain to it.
It would not be according to the nature of divine grace to require of us
anything we could not do. No reasonable earthly parent would demand an
impossibility of a child, and it is certain our heavenly Father would
not command us to be "perfect even as he is perfect" unless he has
provided abundant grace to bring us up to this blessed experience.
According to our own power or ability we could never reach such an
exalted plane, for it is not within the power of man to change his
depraved nature, and every self-effort to reach a state of perfection is
but vain. But God is able to make all grace abound and as an All-wise
Father he has made it possible that we should be perfect.

From the scriptures quoted we can plainly see that the perfection
required of us is reasonable and just. Had he commanded us to be perfect
in knowledge, wisdom, judgment, or in anything else in an absolute
sense, we would be forced to the conclusion that God has either required
an impossibility of us or it is not for us to attain in this life and
therefore belongs only to the resurrected state. But we can clearly see
the nature of his requirements and that they are all within the limits
of his grace toward us in this life.

When Jesus commanded us to be perfect (Matt. 5:48) we can quite easily
comprehend his meaning when we notice in the few preceding verses that
we should be perfect in love, even to the extent that we shall love our
enemies, that we may indeed be the children of our Father which is in
heaven. The children of this world love those that love them. It is an
easy matter and quite natural to do this. But to love our enemies is
very contrary to the depraved nature; unless there has been the
cleansing wrought within, there will be some inward consciousness of
hatred toward those who despitefully use and persecute us. The high
standard of righteousness which Jesus teaches here and throughout this
chapter is the standard of sanctification. The love of God must be
perfected in us, which destroys every element of the old nature, of
which hatred is a prominent characteristic.

The first and great commandment, both of the old and new dispensation,
"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart," etc., is also a
standard too high to be attained perfectly without the experience of
entire sanctification. This commandment was given during the old
dispensation; but it was not possible then that it could be kept
perfectly, for there was no provision then made to destroy the power of,
and cleanse the heart from, inbred depravity. The blood of those
sacrifices could do no more than sanctify "to the purifying of the
flesh." The inward condition of the heart could not be changed. Thus we
see clearly that this commandment could not be kept in the New Testament
sense of perfect love. Now, the blood of Jesus, which he shed on the
cross that he might sanctify and cleanse our hearts, can make us holy.
When the heart has realized the power of this cleansing and the love of
God "shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost," we can in deed and in
truth love the Lord our God with all our heart, soul, mind, and
strength. Praise God for his wonderful love to us! He furnishes the love
with which to love him. If we but give him our hearts he will furnish
all the rest. He wants an empty, clean vessel into which to pour out his
love, that it may be manifested in this dark and sinful world.

Oh, that every child of God could see the imperative need of an absolute
consecration and then cheerfully and voluntarily meet the conditions of
the same, so that God could fill each heart with love, and cause each
one to know what it means to love God with all our heart. As long as our
affections are divided between God and anything else, our love is not
perfect and until the regenerate heart has made the scriptural
consecration, there will be a divided condition of the affections. The
obedient regenerate heart dwells in God, and thus is taught of God the
necessity of the perfect consecration, which, when fully complied with,
enables the perfect cleansing to become effected. The apostle John
says, "Herein is our love made perfect," and "his love is perfected in
us."

No one can ever be fully satisfied in this redemption life until this
second work of grace is accomplished in the heart. Justification brings
us into the blessed kingdom of God's love. Sanctification perfects his
love in us. This second grace enables us to realize not only the meaning
of perfect love, but we also comprehend the glorious fact that God has
wrought in us perfect purity and holiness. This implies our being
perfect in God's will, and because we have yielded our will completely
to him. Every disposition of our will which sought its own way is now in
perfect conformity with his and as Jesus could say in Gethsemane, "Thy
will be done," which meant death on Calvary to him, so we have said the
same to God with a vivid consciousness that once for all it meant death
to us. It has required the perfect will of Jesus to obtain this grace of
sanctification for us, and it now requires our perfect will to receive
it from him. Here is where we can stand perfect and complete in all the
will of God. Another beautiful characteristic of sanctification is
perfect unity. One of the most striking features of the religious world
today is division among those who profess to believe in and follow
Christ. There is no greater evil existing than this. Men have made
creeds and sects and have persuaded the people to join them, until the
disgusting spectacle of division is seen everywhere, and the
non-professing world is amazed at the sickening sight. Hireling
preachers are pleading for their respective denominations, and while
many honest children of God are dissatisfied with this sad state of
affairs, they are taught from the pulpit that God has made these
divisions and it is the duty of every Christian to join and support
them. But such is not the will of God; he has designed that his people
should all be one, and in his prayer Jesus expresses the extent of this
unity. "That they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in
thee, that they also may be one in us." This certainly implies a
wonderful and perfect unity. Many sect advocates cry, "Impossible,
impossible; God's people cannot be one." But the whole theme of Jesus'
prayer is unity. As we carefully read this prayer we can readily
perceive the divine method to effect this unity. It is plain and
simple: "Sanctify them through thy truth: thy word is truth.... Neither
pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me
through their word; that they all may be one." Then in Heb. 2:11 we see
again that this is God's plan--"For both he that sanctifieth and they
who are sanctified are all of one."

This grace not only brings us into a perfect inward unity with Jesus
himself, but it just as truly brings us all into a perfect inward unity
with each other. Divisions, sects, and factions are productions of the
flesh (Gal. 5:19-21) and not of the Spirit. Sanctification destroys all
the works of the flesh and extracts the very root itself and renders
divisions impossible. Every sect yoke is destroyed because of the
anointing. Isa. 10:27. It is the work of the Holy Spirit to effect this
unity in us with God and with each other. Every human effort to
accomplish this must necessarily end in failure. There are many efforts
today to effect a union among Christians, but union is not scriptural
unity. Union of sects is far from the scriptural unity of believers. A
union consists upon a human basis and may consist of a union of sects,
or a union of individuals, without any conditions of spirituality
whatever. Each individual or body retaining its distinctive and separate
division. Scriptural unity is based upon the inner-wrought grace of
sanctification, where everything non-spiritual is entirely destroyed and
the Holy Spirit has the right of way in every respect according to the
perfect will of God.

It is only as we are thus perfected in this grace that the prayer of
Jesus will be fully answered and his people lose every vestige of
division. No sanctified heart can remain loyal to anything that
separates the people of God. All sect holiness is below the Bible
standard, for it upholds that which sanctification destroys. This is a
far-reaching assertion, but in the light of God's word it is true. Many
have lost this experience by listening to the perverted teachings of
false shepherds and remaining in sectism. God says the "anointing"
breaks and destroys the yoke, and no sect yoke will ever again fit on
the neck of a sanctified person, if such remains loyal to the Holy
Spirit. Praise God! He alone can effect perfect unity in us, by his
divine process--sanctification. Then by the careful adherence to the
teachings of God's word this beautiful apostolic unity can be maintained
and demonstrated among men, and the prayer of Jesus further answered,
"That the world may believe that thou hast sent me."

=The difference between present and future perfection.= In his letter to
the church at Philippi, the apostle speaks of a perfection in the
future, which unless understood may confuse some minds upon this
subject. In Phil. 3:12 he writes, "Not as though I had already attained,
either were already perfect: but I follow after, if that I may apprehend
that for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus." Here it sounds as
though perfection is not attainable in this life, but if we notice the
language of the context we can clearly see that he is speaking of the
resurrection of the dead. Ver. 11. It is the resurrection perfection
that he here has reference to, which cannot be attained in this life. We
must wait with the apostle until this "mortality shall be swallowed up
of life," before we reach a state of absolute perfection, and with him,
"press toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in
Christ Jesus." But in verse 15 he says, "Let us therefore as many as be
perfect be thus minded," showing that there is a present perfection
which he, with others, has already attained. This is the experience
which it is the will of God for us all to enjoy. For by one offering he
hath perfected forever them that are sanctified. Dear reader, have you
attained it, or are you yet living beneath your blood-bought privilege?
"Now the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus,
that great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting
covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in
you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; to
whom be glory forever and ever. Amen."--Heb. 13:20, 21.




CHAPTER IX

Holiness


=Holiness an attribute of God.= "Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the
gods? who is like thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing
wonders?"--Ex. 15:11. "And one cried unto another, and said, Holy, holy,
holy, is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full of his glory."--Isa.
6:3. "And the four beasts had each of them six wings about him; and they
were full of eyes within: and they rest not day and night, saying, Holy,
holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come."--Rev.
4:8.

=God must be worshiped in holiness.= "Give unto the Lord the glory due
unto his name: bring an offering and come before him: worship the Lord
in the beauty of holiness."--1 Chron. 16:29. "Sing unto the Lord, O ye
saints of his, and give thanks at the remembrance of his
holiness."--Psa. 30:4.

=God's throne and dwelling-place.= "God reigneth over the heathen: God
sitteth upon the throne of his holiness."--Psa. 47:8. "For thus saith
the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is Holy; I
dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite
and humble spirit."--Isa. 57:15. "Be silent, O all flesh, before the
Lord: for he is raised up out of his holy habitation."--Zech. 2:13.
"Look down from heaven, and behold from the habitation of thy holiness
and thy glory."--Isa. 63:15.

=Holiness becomes God's house.= "Thy testimonies are very sure: holiness
becometh thine house, O Lord, forever."--Psa. 93:5. "The aged women
likewise, that they be in behavior as becometh holiness."--Titus 2:3.

=The church of God is called a mountain of holiness.= "The Lord bless
thee, O habitation of justice, and mountain of holiness."--Jer. 31:23.
"Thus saith the Lord; I am returned unto Zion, and will dwell in the
midst of Jerusalem: and Jerusalem shall be called a city of truth; and
the mountain of the Lord of hosts the holy mountain."--Zech. 8:3. "The
wolf and the lamb shall feed together, and the lion shall eat straw like
the bullock: and the dust shall be the serpent's meat. They shall not
hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain saith the Lord."--Isa. 65:25.

=God speaks in holiness.= "God hath spoken in his holiness; I will
rejoice."--Psa. 60:6. "Mine heart within me is broken because of the
prophets; all my bones shake; I am like a drunken man, and like a man
whom wine hath overcome, because of the Lord, and because of the words
of his holiness."--Jer. 23:9.

=The way of holiness.= "And an highway shall be there, and a way, and it
shall be called The way of holiness; the unclean shall not pass over it;
but it shall be for those; the wayfaring men, though fools, shall not
err therein. No lion shall be there, nor any ravenous beast shall go up
thereon, it shall not be found there; but the redeemed shall walk there
and the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with songs
and everlasting joy upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and
gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away."--Isa. 35:8-10.

=The courts of holiness.= "But they that have gathered it shall eat it,
and praise the Lord; and they that have brought it together shall drink
it in the courts of my holiness."--Isa. 62:9.

=The people of God are holy.= "The people of thy holiness have possessed
but a little while: our adversaries have trodden down thy
sanctuary."--Isa. 63:18. "And they shall call them, The holy people, The
redeemed of the Lord: and thou shalt be called, Sought out, A city not
forsaken."--Isa. 62:12. "And the Lord hath avouched thee this day to be
his peculiar people, as he hath promised thee, and that thou shouldest
keep all his commandments; and to make thee high above all nations which
he hath made, in praise, and in name, and in honor; and that thou mayest
be an holy people unto the Lord thy God, as he hath spoken."--Deut.
26:18, 19. "But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy
nation, a peculiar people; that ye should show forth the praises of him
who hath called you out of darkness into his marvelous light."--1 Pet.
2:9.

=We are called unto holiness.= "Follow peace with all men, and holiness,
without which no man shall see the Lord."--Heb. 12:14. "But as he which
hath called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation;
because it is written, Be ye holy, for I am holy."--1 Pet. 1:15, 16.
"For God hath not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness."--1
Thess. 4:7. "That he would grant unto us, that we being delivered out of
the hand of our enemies might serve him without fear, in holiness and
righteousness before him, all the days of our life."--Luke 1:74, 75.
"For they verily for a few days chastened us after their own pleasure;
but he for our profit, that we might be partakers of his
holiness."--Heb. 12:10.

=A perfect holiness attainable.= "Having therefore these promises, dearly
beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and
spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God."--2 Cor. 7:1.

=Fruit unto holiness.= "But now being made free from sin, and become
servants to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end
everlasting life."--Rom. 6:22.

The foregoing scriptures are but a few out of the many plain texts from
the word of God teaching us the glorious doctrine of holiness. Some
professing Christians look upon this doctrine as unscriptural and
impracticable, but in the light of the gospel of Christ there is no
other doctrine taught than holiness. The very fact that God, and Jesus
Christ, and the Holy Spirit, the word of God, and heaven, and all the
celestial hosts are holy, at once suggests to every reasonable mind the
utter necessity of holiness in the heart and life of man. The apostle
says (Eph. 2:10) that "we are his workmanship, created in Jesus Christ
unto good works."

Were we to look upon depraved humanity in the image of Adam, we would
see nothing but sin and unholiness; but God has brought into existence a
new order of creation in Christ Jesus. The first Adam is a sad and
irreparable failure, and in him we see nothing good. All who are living
according to the flesh are dead in trespasses and sins, and of course
are unholy; but the second Adam, which is Christ has brought redemption
and life, in whom there is purity and holiness. The old man is corrupt
according to the deceitful lusts, which =must be put off=. The new man is
created in righteousness and true holiness, which =must be put on=. The
reason some do not comprehend the doctrine of holiness is, they are yet
living in the old creation, hence their nature and mind are corrupt. It
is utterly impossible for such to be holy in this condition. The
command, "Be ye holy," does not apply to them. They are not God's
people. The first step for such to take is to repent, which if they obey
they will be brought into the kingdom of God's holiness; into the new
creation, the workmanship of God in Christ Jesus. Bless the Lord, O my
soul, for this new creation of purity and holiness. All the living
creatures of heaven bow before him that sitteth upon the throne, saying,
Holy, holy, holy! and every sanctified heart on earth can join the
blessed anthem of praise and adoration with the consciousness that the
all-cleansing blood of Christ has reached its inmost depth and purified
it for the habitation of the heavenly guest, the Holy Spirit. The pure
heart is God's dwelling-place on earth. Jesus says (John 14:23) "If a
man love me, he will keep my words and my Father will love him, and we
will come unto him, and make our abode with him."

       *       *       *       *       *

Thus we see that God not only dwells in the high and holy heaven, but
also upon earth in the hearts of his obedient people. Who could
consistently believe that God would dwell in a corrupt heart? "He shall
be in you," is the promise of Jesus. "At that day [the day when the Holy
Spirit comes into the heart], ye shall know that I am in my Father, and
ye in me, and I in you." Oh, the depths of the riches of this wonderful
redemption, that God would forgive the guilty sinner, then purify his
heart and make it his earthly abode. This is his will toward every son
and daughter of Adam's race. He will create us in the image of Christ,
so that we may truly serve him without fear, in holiness and
righteousness before him all the days of our life. This can be called
none other than the way of holiness. It is God's own way, and is truly a
highway too high for anything unclean to pass over. It is on a perfect
level with heaven itself, and yet it is a highway here upon earth for
all the ransomed of the Lord to travel upon. It is so plain and simple
that no one need be led astray. The wayfaring men though fools, shall
not err therein. A wayfaring man means one who is on the way, one who
lives on the way. A seafaring man is one who lives on the sea. This way
is so safe that though a man may be simple in the estimation of the
world, and may be called a fool, yet if he keeps obedient to God he
shall not be led astray. "No lion shall be there, nor any ravenous beast
shall go up thereon." This indicates a very safe way, where we need not
fear any evil. Everything of the flesh or the old man is ruled out, and
none but the redeemed shall walk there. We see therefore from the
description of the prophet that this is a highway, a clean way, a simple
way, a safe way, a way of songs and everlasting joy, which necessarily
constitutes a way of holiness.

This is the way upon which the people of God are truly returning to
Zion. This Zion is the scriptural name of the church of God. The people
of God have been led into captivity of ecclesiastical bondage (Babylon),
and the pure light of the gospel of holiness has been darkened by the
creeds and doctrines of men, but God is revealing to his own that
sanctification is a Bible doctrine; they seek for, and obtain it, and
thereby every sectarian yoke is broken, his people find themselves upon
this highway of holiness and at home in Zion, the church, free from the
bondage of sectism. This is the work of God himself, and will not cease
until every one of his people are brought home to Zion, upon the way of
holiness. This is the highway that is left for the remnant of his
people. Isa. 11:16. This remnant shall be gathered out of all the creeds
of men into the one fold, into the true unity of Christ. "For both he
that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are all of one."

The prophet foresaw this blessed return of the people of God and tells
us "they shall call them, The holy people." There are some who call
themselves holiness people, but the prophet says we shall be called,
"The holy people." Holiness factions and sects have actually sprung into
existence, which declare that sectism and division is necessary. This
class of holiness is not that described in the foregoing scriptures.
Bible holiness will in every individual instance destroy everything out
of men's hearts that separates or divides. Divisions are the outgrowth
of carnality and not of the Spirit of God. Every profession of holiness,
therefore, which sanctions division and sectism cannot possibly be the
holiness of the Bible. This may seem to some a strong assertion, but it
will stand the test of the word of God.

No scriptural unity will ever be effected among the people of God
outside the experience of sanctification. Men have repeatedly laid other
foundations, but all to no avail. It is a source of great satisfaction
to know that wherever the Holy Spirit has the right of way in the hearts
of men, there is found true apostolic unity, both in spirit and in
doctrine. This is a well authenticated fact which is demonstrated in
thousands of hearts today. The holy people are one people, and all are
willing to be measured by all of the word of God, which proves to the
"profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction
in righteousness. That the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished unto all good works." The apostle teaches us, in Heb. 12:10,
that God imparts unto us his holiness: we are partakers of it. It is not
an experience which we by our efforts can attain to, but upon the
clearly defined conditions of his word we come into possession of his
holiness. It is all wrought within us by himself. "Not by works of
righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved
us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost."
Bible holiness is truly an imported article directly from God out of
heaven. Some imported goods in this country are much more expensive and
of better quality than those of home manufacture. Many of our people
prefer to pay the extra expense in order to obtain the better quality,
and usually are abundantly satisfied with their purchase. This may serve
to illustrate this blessed holiness of the Bible. Men's professions are
sometimes like an inferior homemade piece of goods. It soon wears
threadbare and betrays its quality, but the genuine imported article of
Bible holiness proves satisfactory in every respect, and the more it is
worn the better it becomes. It has cost us everything, but it proves to
be worth more than everything to us. The reason why some people have
failed to get it is, they are unwilling to pay the price. They are
deceived by the false doctrine that they do not need to consecrate their
all, and hence have accepted a holiness manufactured by man, a homemade
article which will never stand the test. A definite, absolute
consecration to the loss of all things will never fail to procure the
genuine article of true Bible holiness, which will stand the wear of
every trial of life and the test of the judgment.




CHAPTER X

The Vine and the Branches


"I am the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman. Every branch in me
that beareth not fruit he taketh away; and every branch that beareth
fruit, he purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit. Now ye are
clean through the word which I have spoken unto you. Abide in me, and I
in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in
the vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in me. I am the vine, ye are
the branches: he that abideth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth
forth much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing. If a man abide not
in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered; and men gather
them, and cast them into the fire, and they are burned. If ye abide in
me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall
be done unto you. Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much
fruit; so shall ye be my disciples."--John 15:1-8.

       *       *       *       *       *

This beautiful analogy teaches us an important lesson. The standard of
sanctification is clearly exemplified in the relation between the vine
and the branches. Christ is the vine, and every individual Christian is
an individual branch; every branch is an individual member of the vine,
and every Christian is an individual member of Christ.

       *       *       *       *       *

What a clear view of the church, and how plainly we can see that there
is but one. Every regenerate soul is by one Spirit baptized into this
one body. This vine is cared for and kept by God himself, who is the
husbandman. Every branch must be a living, fruit-bearing one. It is
placed into the vine by the hand which will care for it, and give it
every necessary treatment to cause it to bring forth much fruit. If it
bears fruit it will be kept in the vine; if it does not bear fruit it
will be taken away. The same life which flows through the vine also
flows into the branches. It is the branches that bear the fruit. It is
the part of the vine to sustain the branches, and the part of the
branches to bear fruit. The fruit is the production of the vine-life in
the branches. The word of God teaches us that Christ is pure and holy,
and in Rom. 11:16 we are taught that if the root be holy, so are the
branches. The manner of the induction of the branches into the vine is
illustrated by the process of grafting. We are not grown into Christ,
but grafted into him. The natural branches of a vine grow out of the
vine, and accordingly bear the vine-fruit, but by grace we are grafted
into Christ, the vine, and bear the vine-fruit.

A certain writer who advocates the repression theory of sanctification
says: "But if I want a tree wholly made good I take it when young and,
cutting the stem off on the ground, I graft just where it emerges from
the soil; I watch over every bud which the old nature could possibly put
forth until the flow of sap from the old roots into the new stem is so
complete that the old life has, as it were, been entirely conquered and
covered of the new. Now I have a tree entirely renewed--emblem of a
Christian who has learned in entire consecration to surrender everything
for Christ, and in a whole-hearted faith wholly to abide in him. If in
this case the old tree were a reasonable being that could co-operate
with the gardener, what would the gardener's language be to it? Would it
not be this: 'Yield now thyself entirely to this new nature with which I
have invested thee; repress every tendency of the old nature to give
buds or sprouts; let all thy sap and all thy life-powers rise up into
this graft from yonder beautiful tree which I have put on thee, so shalt
thou bring forth sweet and much fruit.' And the language of the tree to
the gardener would be: 'When thou graftest me, oh, spare not a single
branch, let everything of the old self, even the smallest bud, be
destroyed, that I may no longer live in my own, but in that other life
that was cut off and brought and put upon me that I might be wholly new
and good.' And once again, could you afterwards ask the renewed tree, as
it was bearing abundant fruit, what it could say of itself, its answer
would be this: 'In me (that is, my roots) there dwelleth no good thing;
I am ever inclined to evil; the sap I collect from the soil is in its
nature corrupt, and ready to show itself in bearing evil fruit. But just
where the sap rises into the sunshine to ripen into fruit, the wise
gardener hath clothed me with a new life through which my sap is
purified and all my powers are renewed to the bringing forth of good
fruit.'"

This author has entirely reversed the scriptural order of grafting in
his application of the graft and root, and has illustrated the relation
of Christ and the believer by the natural grafting process which can in
no sense scripturally apply to this holy relation. Christ is the vine or
root, and not the graft. The natural process of grafting is to graft the
good graft into a poor root. The graft will grow into a tree and bear
the same kind of fruit as the tree from which it was taken, and thus the
gardener increases the production of good fruit. But the divine process
of grafting is just the reverse. In Rom. 11:24 the apostle says we are
grafted into the olive tree (Christ) "contrary to nature." The
husbandman takes the penitent sinner out of the kingdom of darkness and
translates him into the kingdom of his dear Son. In this regeneration
process the sinner (the graft) that was sinful and bore fruit is by
God's own process grafted into Christ, the holy vine, and from thence to
bear holy fruit. This is certainly a great mystery, like all the works
of God's grace, and is indeed contrary to nature, but in perfect
conformity with the plan of redemption.

Now, in this condition, there is a certain requirement of the graft
necessary that it may bear the vine-fruit; it must =abide= in the vine.
This abiding requires a careful watchfulness lest there might be some
sprout of the old inward nature, which yet exists within the newly
grafted branch, which would spring up and hinder the perfect
fruit-bearing of the vine-life. And in this early life, in this new
relation of the branch with the vine, it is an attested fact that in
quantity this fruit production is more or less hindered by the presence
of the old inward nature, in the branch, which if permitted to sprout
and grow would certainly prevent the growth of the vine-fruit entirely,
and thereby cause the branch to be cut off. That the branch is in the
vine there can be no question, for its environments are completely
changed and it finds itself a stranger to all of its former
associations, customs, and habits. That the vine-life is in the branch
there can equally be no question, for the branch has the inward
consciousness bearing witness that it belongs to the vine, and it enjoys
the sweet fellowship of the vine and all its branches. Also it bears the
vine-fruit which brings upon itself the approval of the husbandman.

But this early and new relationship is only the justified life of the
branch. The standard of sanctification of the author from whom we have
just quoted is in no respect any higher than this, and were it not that
there is a higher standard taught in this lesson and in many other
scriptures, we would have to be satisfied with justification only.

"Every branch that beareth fruit, he purgeth it, that it may bring forth
more fruit." This purging is another process quite contrary to nature,
for the term signifies an inward cleansing. A vine-dresser can prune or
trim a branch and thereby practically make it clean outwardly from all
unnecessary or harmful sprouts which would hinder it from bearing fruit,
but there is no known natural process by which the grafted branch could
have its inward conditions changed which would affect its nature.

We can see clearly that the entire process of grafting the inferior
branch into the good root, and the subsequent purging is wholly contrary
to nature, for no man with an object of profit would do any such
grafting, neither could anyone reasonably expect the inward conditions
of such a graft to become changed.

This purging is wrought within for the purpose of an increase of holy
fruit. How beautifully it pictures the experience of sanctification, and
subsequent work wrought in the soul of the justified fruit-bearing child
of God. It is not a pruning of any unholy sprouts, for they are to be
wholly kept from sprouting in the process of the life of bearing holy
fruit in this justified relation. The branch is now bearing the very
fruit of the holy root, but there is something to be done in it that it
may bring forth more fruit; it must be purged from its inward depraved
dispositions which it possessed from its parent stock--its "old man ...
that the body of sin might be destroyed." Before the purging there was
much time and energy occupied in keeping its depraved nature from
sprouting. The holy nature of the root was indeed being manifested in
the production of holy fruit which was a source of satisfaction, but
there was that inward consciousness of an unfavorable condition which
hindered the root-life from producing in the branch the quantity
necessary to the perfect satisfaction of the husbandman, the vine or the
branch.

But now what a glorious change: the old nature is entirely gone, and the
sweet soul-rest which the purged branch now enjoys is beyond the power
of mortal to express; it can now repose itself so sweetly in the holy
vine in its perfectly consecrated life, without any inward hindrance to
a perfect flow of the vine-life through its entire being. It can now
bring forth more fruit, for every energy from the root is sent direct
into the fruit-buds of the branch, and the result is glorious. This
purging is just what perfects the inward harmony of the branch with the
vine. It could not continue very long in the abiding condition without a
consciousness of the need of the purging process. This process becomes a
necessity to every branch which abides. "He that abideth in me, and I in
him, the same bringeth forth much fruit," which is equivalent to the
text, "Every branch that beareth fruit, he purgeth it, that it may bring
forth more fruit." It is purged that it may bring forth "more fruit,"
and now the object of purging is realized, it brings forth "much fruit."
Thank God for the purging, the subsequent work in the heart!

The apostles had not yet received this experience. They were clean
through the word which Jesus had spoken unto them, to the extent of
their knowledge and experience. Unquestionably they were clean from
guilt and condemnation, for they were taken out from the world--were no
more of it, and the world hated them. They were living in perfect
obedience to all the known word of God and were clean through that word,
but they had not had the pentecostal purging, "purifying their hearts by
faith," as Peter himself testifies of the sanctification of himself and
all who were at Pentecost, as well as the experience of Cornelius and
his household.

Truly we have much reason to praise God for his wonderful grace in which
he brings man, his fallen creature, into such a position that he may
become a son of God, then made pure from all the depraved dispositions
of his fallen nature. "If a man therefore purge himself from these, he
shall be a vessel unto honor, sanctified, and meet for the Master's use,
and prepared unto every good work."--2 Timothy 2:21.




CHAPTER XI

Some Helpful Thoughts on Consecration


The experience of sanctification is obtained upon the conditions of
definite consecration and faith. In every consecration the soul reaches
a point where it must either go through to the death, or else go back
and lose the grace of God entirely. The Holy Spirit will make it plain
what this death implies, and at last the dying soul goes through its
last struggle and yields up its last treasure. When this point is
reached and passed, the Holy Spirit will bear witness that the demands
of God are now fully met. When Moses had completed the work of building
the tabernacle and had placed everything in its proper order, as God
commanded him, it is said that "Moses finished the work." So it can be
said of us and so each of us can personally testify by the witness of
the Spirit bearing witness with our spirit in this absolute and definite
consecration, that we have "finished the work." Every doubt as to the
completion of this consecration is banished, and has no room to exist in
our hearts, for we know that it is complete. We can so sweetly and
willingly say, "Thy will be done," with a most delightful consciousness
that all the past, present, and future, of all that pertains to our
life, is yielded up to his blessed will. Nothing on earth is held half
so sweet and precious as his will.

We can realize down deep in our souls what Jesus meant when he gave
himself to sanctify us and said, "I come to do thy will." We can enter
into the fellowship of his sufferings and death, for all that we have
and are, and all that we expect to be in the future, and all that we
know and ever expect to know, are now forever and eternally yielded up
to that precious will of God. It required the will of Jesus to be
yielded up to death to do the will of the Father that we might be
sanctified, and it equally requires our will to be yielded up to death
and the loss of all things, that we might be sanctified. It required his
will even to the death to obtain it for us, and it requires our will
even to death to receive it from him. Yes, dear reader, a real death; so
real that it includes everything, and it can only be said of us as it
was said of the Colossian saints, "Ye are dead, and your life is hid
with Christ in God."

This death consecration is beautifully typified in the consecration and
sanctification of the priests of the Old Testament dispensation. In Lev.
8 we read that Moses was commanded of the Lord to take Aaron and his
sons and three animals with him. The blood of one of these animals was
to be shed for the sin-offering; one for the "burnt offering," and one
for the "consecration" offering. The blood of each was shed and applied
separately for a special purpose. Each finds its antitype in the
precious blood of Jesus, who offered himself without spot to God that he
might sanctify the church. The blood of the sin-offering provides for
that part of our nature which would naturally reach out and cling to
those things which are sinful. In every justified heart which is not yet
wholly sanctified there exists such a principle which in itself is
depraved and sinful, and were it permitted to respond to the sinful
things without, it would bring the believers into transgression. This is
the "body of sin," or "our old man," which according to the law of the
Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, must be destroyed and cleansed out. This
existing in the heart, if unrestrained, is the fruitful soil out of
which grows every evil work. We can see its productions in many
different aspects in the religious world today. Every sect on earth is a
production of this body of sin. Every manifestation of carnal division
is some of its evil fruits. Everything that is in the least degree
contrary to the pure word of God, whether it be word or deed, is but the
outgrowth of this evil thing, which was created and planted into the
hearts of Adam and Eve by the devil, and has become the dominating
characteristic of depraved humanity. Justification does not cleanse this
out of the heart. It only takes away the guilt and trespasses of the
sinner, and brings him into the favor of God, who gave his Son a
"trespass-offering" for the world. But Jesus gave himself a
"sin-offering" for the church, and when the heart has yielded up to the
death for the destruction of this depravity it can truly be said of such
an one that we are dead to sin, for the blood of Jesus in this
sin-offering will most certainly effect this cleansing.

But a true Bible consecration includes something more than a yielding up
of the heart for the cleansing out of this sin principle. In the type,
we see there was another animal sacrificed in this consecration service.
It was the one for the "burnt offering." The blood of this sacrifice
corresponds with the sacrifice of the blood of Jesus which also provides
for the cleansing of that part of our nature that clings to the things
of life which in themselves are not sinful but are God-given blessings.
Our unsanctified affections must also become purified from every taint
of depravity. That this may be accomplished, it becomes necessary that
the heart yield up to the death every cherished object, even though it
be a God-given blessing; it must be yielded up and laid upon the altar
as a "burnt offering." The affections cannot be purified until the
object of the affections is yielded. We cannot perfectly obey the first
and great commandment, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy
strength," until every affection is fully taken off from every object of
earth and placed upon God exclusively. This means that we willingly lay
upon the altar our loved ones, no matter how sacred or precious they may
be--father, mother, brother, sister, husband, wife, children, home,
property, reputation, and everything within the scope of our earthly
existence. All henceforth and forever yielded up to God, no more to be
ours, as really and as perfectly as though we were breathing our last
upon our death-bed, and then in due time we were laid into our coffin,
the lid fastened down, and lowered into the grave, the grave filled up
and nothing left but a mound to mark where our earthly remains lie. Or,
to view the subject from another standpoint, this yielding up must be
as real as though our loved ones and every cherished treasure of earth
were laid upon the altar, to be offered up a burnt sacrifice. In due
time the fire will be kindled, and our cherished objects will one by one
be consumed into smoke and finally all will disappear, a consumed
sacrifice unto the Lord.

A quarter of a century ago my own precious mother was brought to this
consecration. She was shown by the Holy Spirit that she did not have her
children perfectly yielded up to the Lord. She was praying for their
conversion. At last she became willing to lay them upon the altar and
she did it thoroughly. She gave them to the Lord a living sacrifice. In
a short time her four oldest were converted, and in due time the two
others as they grew up were also brought into the fold of Christ. She
rejoiced and praised God for this and often expressed herself that her
children were not her own, they were the Lord's, for his service or
sacrifice, just as he should see proper. At last this consecration was
brought to the test. The Lord began to kindle the fire to consume the
"burnt offering." He laid his hand upon one and took her home to heaven.
Then another, and sent him thousands of miles away to preach the gospel
in regions beyond. Then another, and sent him far distant in another
direction to labor in the gospel vineyard. Then another, and sent her
still another direction to publish the word of God; and as these
cherished objects thus vanished out of her sight she could say, "They
are the Lord's, not mine." In one of her letters she wrote me these
words: "Well, my dear boy, I truly realized what it meant years ago to
lay my dear children upon the altar of the Lord: but now I realize what
it means to see them consumed into smoke."

Dear brother and sister, this is what a burnt offering means, and how
good our heavenly Father is to require this sacrifice of us! Oh, how
many sad heartaches it saves us! How many bitter tears of anguish and
sorrow! I have stood at the open grave where a poor grief-stricken
mother wrung her hands and cried out, "Oh, I cannot, I cannot give up my
precious darling. Let me be buried with it--I cannot be parted from it!"
I have also stood at another grave, where the form of a consecrated
loved one was sinking out of human sight. The mother stood gazing at
the object of earth as it was laid back to dust, then with her eyes
turned toward heaven she said, "Dear Lord, thou hast only taken thine
own to thyself; my heart feels the parting pangs, but I say willingly,
'Thy will be done.'"

Ah, what a contrast! The one mother knew nothing of this blessed
consecration, the other did. The one had but little grace to sustain her
in her bereavement, the other had the abounding grace, for she had
already yielded up her sacred treasures to the Lord. The one buried all
her comfort and hope in the grave, the other simply buried a lifeless
form of clay; though sacred and precious to her heart, yet she had
consecrated it to the Lord, and now in seeing it vanish out of her
sight, she could feel that it was not her own. The one returned to her
empty home with her heart full of sorrow, the other returned in the
comfort of Him who comforteth us in all our tribulations. She had paid
the price of =her all=, and now she enjoys the blessing of =Jesus'
all=--the abiding of his glorious presence, which comforts her heart
and home, and fills the emptiness with himself and his bountiful grace.

Oh, how beautiful and reasonable to consecrate everything that our
affections have held sacred and dear, to him. We all know very well that
all these treasures of earth are of no enduring substance. No matter how
much they may be to us, they in due time will either vanish out of our
sight, or else we will have to leave them. How much better, and how much
more satisfactory it is to yield them all up to Jesus, to whom they
rightly belong, and who has only loaned them to us in the first place.
He is justly entitled to all of our affections, for what has he not
yielded up that was due to himself, that he might purchase this glorious
grace for us? Now he wants the supremacy in our hearts' affections, so
that he can fashion us according to himself through and through, and
impart his own nature into our affections, that we may henceforth love
with his love, those sacred treasures around which our affections have
so entwined, and claimed as ours. Before our consecration we loved him,
but these other objects of our love were between us and him. They
hindered our love towards him, and equally hindered his love from
perfectly flowing into our hearts. We loved him, and realized that he
loved us, but it was not perfect; there were objects in our way, and
there were objects in his way. These objects were our sacred treasures.
Depravity had affected our affections so that we could not hold these
treasures as we should. But now what a satisfactory change! We yielded
all these objects to him, and took him in their stead. Now he occupies
the place. He owns our treasures, and we own him. But what of our
treasures? We have them all back again, through him. Before our
consecration, they were between us and him. Now he is between us and
them, and with him he freely gives us all things. He can use all of
these things according to his own good pleasure, making any disposition
of them which might seem good in his sight, for they are his, not ours.
If he should place us over them as his stewards, then we hold them in
trust for him and do with them just as he orders, and when, one by one,
they consume away on the altar of his service, or, if according to his
sovereign will, he shall remove them out of our sight, we can say,
"Amen, Lord, thy will be done."

Now, in the act of Bible consecration, the believer may not realize all
of this, and the utmost depth of the cleansing that has been wrought in
the heart and affections, or the difference between the sin-offering and
the burnt offering, but it will not be long afterward, until the
knowledge of this cleansing shall begin to dawn upon us and our soul
becomes more and more enraptured in this glorious experience of
sanctification. But we see in the type still another animal to be
slain--the consecration offering. The blood of this animal was applied
to the body of Aaron and his sons. First it was put upon the tips of
their right ears, the thumbs of their right hands, and the great toes of
their right feet. Then afterwards it was sprinkled with the anointing
oil upon Aaron and his garments too, and upon his sons and their
garments. This ceremonial process was the completion of their
sanctification. The blood of this consecration offering corresponds with
the blood of Jesus which provides for the sanctification of our body. In
this consecration we not only offer up our hearts and affections to
Jesus, but we also present our bodies a living sacrifice. This includes
our all, spirit, soul and body. Our ears, hands, and feet, our entire
physical being, is dedicated henceforth to his service, to labor and
suffer hardships, to be used in sacrifice, or service, either at the
martyrs' stake or on the gospel altar, any way, and every way, in which
he may order it for his own honor and glory. These eyes shall see, this
tongue shall speak, this mind shall think, these ears shall hear, these
hands shall labor, these feet shall run, this strength and these
energies, this heart shall beat, every faculty, organ, and appetite
shall be used only for him, who has so freely given himself for us; and
thus this body becomes the temple, and the earthly dwelling-place of the
Holy Ghost, his own exclusive dedicated property. While it is not
possible that we could itemize these things in the consecration of our
bodies, there is a yielding up of our all which sweeps the scope and
brings the witness of the Spirit that our consecration is complete and
we have "finished the work." We are now upon believing grounds, and
faith can appropriate the power of the all-cleansing blood.

     "By faith I venture on his word,
         My doubts are o'er, the vict'ry won,
      He said the altar sanctifies,
         I just believe him and 'tis done."




CHAPTER XII

Questions and Answers


Question. How may we know definitely that we are sanctified?

Answer. We may know it by knowing that we have met all the conditions.
This grace is obtained upon the conditions of consecration and faith.
When we are sure that we have measured up to a true Bible consecration,
we will have no difficulty in knowing that we are sanctified. The depth
of meaning of this consecration does not necessarily need to be fully
comprehended by the seeker, as we enter into this covenant, but there is
a yielding up of ourself and entire all, to the known and unknown will
of God, to an extent that covers everything. God knows when we have
reached and passed this point, and it will not be long before the Holy
Spirit will definitely witness to us that the consecration is complete,
and the covenant ratified by this glorious indwelling consciousness.

This consecration may be illustrated by the contract and union of holy
matrimony. When the bride and groom enter into the covenant according to
God's word, they have little knowledge of the obligations they are
taking upon themselves. They know nothing of the detailed realities of
life; its joys and sorrows, hardships and trials that are before them;
but they know that they dearly love each other, and have not the
slightest fear in yielding themselves to each other completely and
exclusively, so long as they both shall live. They enter into this
covenant with all good confidence that the object of their love will not
require anything hard or impossible, and as the future realities of life
unfold and one by one they meet the many responsibilities that the
covenant implies, they find that their love is equal to the
responsibility, and as long as they continue to love each other they
will never have the slightest disposition to break that marriage
covenant.

So the heart which makes the consecration for sanctification will not
comprehend the great scope of its meaning at the time of entering into
this covenant, but if we love Jesus as we should we will not fear what
he may require of us in the details of his will in the future. We are
already enraptured with his love. He has proved himself to be a loving
and faithful Redeemer in dying for us, and now as we see he requires us
to yield ourselves even to death for him, we can confidently enter into
the conditions of this covenant with the assurance that he will demand
nothing of us beyond the power of the love to fulfill.

Yes, we will know definitely when our consecration is complete, and then
we will have no trouble to believe in the promises for the cleansing. As
Bible repentance is the believing ground for justification, so Bible
consecration is the believing ground for sanctification.


Ques. How may we keep sanctified?

Ans. By abiding in the conditions by which we obtained the experience.
As long as our consecration remains intact, and our faith remains firm
in the promises, we are sanctified, no matter what the assertions of our
feelings may be. To cease believing will forfeit our experience. To
cease obeying in any respect will produce the same effect; but "if we
walk in the light as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with
another; and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all
sin."


Ques. If Jesus was not sanctified until his death, how can we be?

Ans. Jesus was sanctified before his death. He testifies to it in John
10:36. There is a sense in which he was sanctified by his death; that
is, he became a perfect redeemer by his death. He set himself apart for
this specific purpose. This is the meaning of the saying of Jesus in
John 17:19--"And for their sakes I sanctify myself, that they also might
be sanctified through the truth." Another scripture, Heb. 5:9 has the
same meaning. "And being made perfect, he became the author of eternal
salvation unto all them that obey him." In the use of the terms
"sanctify" and "perfect" we could by no means infer that Jesus was not
pure and holy before his suffering on the cross. He became a perfect
Saviour by his death and through suffering. It is absurd and casts a
reflection upon the redemption plan, to say that Jesus was not holy
until resurrection. In this sense only was he made "perfect" by his
death. As to his people being holy and sanctified in this life, we have
the whole word of God in favor of such a life. Thank God, it is his will
that we should live "in holiness and righteousness before him all the
days of our life." It does require a death on our part to obtain this
glorious grace. In this respect we must die to get it. Jesus died to
purchase it for us. We must die to receive it--not a literal death, but
a death to sin and the world. The river of Jordan truly signifies a
death, but we can cross over it and remain in this mortal life. The land
of Canaan is the land of holiness, which all of God's people can enter
into and possess in this life.


Ques. Does not the Bible say, "If we say that we have no sin we deceive
ourselves and the truth is not in us"?

Ans. Yes, but this does not teach us that we cannot be free from sin. If
we were to take this verse by itself without its context we might have a
scripture contradictory to the word of God, but if we read the seventh
and ninth verses with the eighth verse of 1 John 1, we see plainly by
these three verses connected that we can be cleansed from all sin and
unrighteousness. This verse implies that if any one who has not been
cleansed from sin should say he has no sin to be cleansed from, he
deceives himself.


Ques. Do we not grow into sanctification and therefore reach it
gradually?

Ans. No; this would be contrary to the plan of redemption. We do not
grow =into= any of the graces. We are commanded to grow IN grace. The
grace of pardon and justification is imparted by the Holy Spirit. We can
grow in this grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour which,
if we do, will soon bring us to the knowledge of our need of purity and
sanctification, and we will see that this is a grace which is intended
for us. We gladly comply with the conditions for the same, and enter
into it by faith. God now performs the work in our hearts by the power
of his Holy Spirit. We cannot do it ourselves, only in the sense that we
meet the required conditions. It is impossible for us to grow into
purity. This is beyond our individual power; it requires the power of
God. We purify ourselves by making the separation of everything
outwardly; God then purifies our hearts by an instantaneous work of
grace. This grace by no means implies a maturity in growth. It only
brings us into a position where we can the more rapidly grow up in
spiritual things.


Ques. Why do we not get it all when we are justified?

Ans. Because the conditions for the two graces are not the same. The
penitent sinner cannot, in his sinful condition, meet the requirements
for sanctification, and God does not mean that he should. All that the
sinner can possibly do is to repent. When he has fully repented, then he
can believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and receive his pardon. This is
justification. He is justified from all his sins through true repentance
and faith. Those are the Scriptural conditions for justification, but
the conditions for sanctification are consecration and faith. Repentance
and consecration are vastly different. The first means to give up all
sinful things, with a godly sorrow for all sins committed, and a solemn
determination that by the grace of God all sinning shall forever cease.
The second means to yield up to God all our good things, every sacred
treasure of our heart and affections, with our body and every ransomed
power, as a living sacrifice. The first is God's requirement of every
sinner. The second is his requirement of every justified believer. The
first is all that the guilty sinner can possibly comprehend. The second
is that which only the justified believer can comprehend. Therefore it
is utterly impossible for us to get sanctified at the time of our
justification. The two are distinct and separate works of grace,
obtained upon distinct and separate conditions.

Some people have vainly believed, and some vainly teach, that there is
but one work of grace; but such a doctrine is contrary to the word of
God, the conditions of the plan of redemption, and the glorious
testimonies of thousands of saints who have lived in the past and those
who are living witnesses today. It is perfectly natural and logical to
every honest and willing child of God who is not yet sanctified to soon
believe that there is a second work of grace. Perhaps it will take a few
months for some to find out their need, but it is only a question of
time till every one will find an inward longing for something more, to
satisfy the inward condition of the heart. To prove this statement let
us listen to the testimonies of those who are simply justified and have
had no teaching on sanctification, whether their Christian life be one
of years or but a few months. Everyone who stands in this justified
relation with God gives expression in some respects according to the
following: "I thank God for salvation and am not sorry that I ever gave
my heart to God, but I do feel the need of a deeper work of grace."
Another will say, "Pray for me that I may have a clean heart." Another
will request prayer for perfect love; another will confess to having
been overcome by sin, and having made some crooked paths, and feels
sorry and wants to get nearer to God and get a better experience.

Now we cannot doubt the sincerity of these hearts, neither their
experience. Their experiences are those of honest, willing children of
God who are anxious to do the whole will of God. Such expressions would
not be given by professors who are void of salvation. The fact is, the
experiences of these hearts teach them the need of the second grace, and
unless they should be deceived by some false doctrines, they would keep
on with such testimonies until they should obtain that perfect love, or
a clean heart, or a deeper work of grace.

Do they not testify that the first work of grace is not deep enough?
They are glad for the first work, but they want something deeper. They
are glad that grace has found their heart, but they want a clean
heart--one that is free from those conscious uprisings of evil which, if
unrestrained, would bring them into condemnation and guilt, and perhaps
have already overcome them and produced such an effect in their lives.
They are glad for the sweet love of God that has found its way into
their hearts, but they long for perfect love. They are conscious of some
obstacles which hinder that love from being perfect, and yet they do not
understand just how those obstacles can be removed. Someone may tell
them that they have all they can get from God and to ask for more would
be presumption, and yet their souls cry out for that which is natural in
the grace of God, and how ready they are, when they hear sanctification
taught, to meet the conditions and enter into the rest for their
souls--this perfect love, this deeper work of grace, and this experience
of a clean heart, and this baptism with the Holy Ghost.

Now let us listen to their testimonies. What do we hear? Ah, we hear
them praising God for this they were so longing for. One will praise God
for a clean heart; another will say he has found the perfect love;
another will testify to the baptism of the Holy Ghost. Others will thank
God for sanctification, and others will call it this sweet soul-rest,
etc., which all mean the same blessed experience of sanctification. Now
if we ask them if they believe in a second work of grace, what will they
answer us? Ah, there is no question about it. They have it in their
hearts, and they are spoiled for any argument upon the subject.

So it is with all God's people who have met the definite conditions for
sanctification and have come into this precious grace. We know it is a
second work.


Ques. How can one keep free from evil thoughts?

Ans. The pure heart and mind do not entertain an evil thought. As soon
as such thoughts are presented they are banished. In 2 Cor. 10:5 we read
how such things are dealt with. "Casting down imaginations, and every
high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God, and
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ." An
evil thought thus captivated does not enter into the heart and therefore
does not become a sin to us. The apostle James says, "When lust hath
conceived, it bringeth forth sin." The evil thought must first enter
into the heart and be conceived into a desire before it becomes sin.

This world is full of sin and iniquity on every hand. We may hear
profanity as we pass along the street, or we may see iniquity before our
eyes daily as we come in contact with the world, we may pick up a
secular paper and read of murder and theft, and thus these evil thoughts
may enter into our minds, but they do not conceive or take root in our
hearts. They are brought into captivity and banished from us. If when
reading or hearing of a murder or theft, someone should see an
opportunity to commit a similar deed and resolve in his heart that he
would do so at his first opportunity, that person would have conceived
the thought in his heart, and in the sight of God he would be a murderer
or a thief, even though he never had the opportunity to carry out the
design. The heart that is purified by the cleansing blood of Christ and
momently kept in the efficacy of that blood, is the sacred
dwelling-place of the Holy Spirit, who has the full and exclusive
control of the heart.

As long as our will is kept in line with the will of God the Holy Spirit
will abide. The word of God says, "Greater is he that is in you than he
that is in the world," and, "No man can enter into a strong man's house
and spoil his goods, except he will first bind the strong man." The
strong man--the Holy Spirit--is in his own house, and it is impossible
for sin to enter in unless we by our own will consent to it. The word of
God speaks of the Holy Spirit as the seal. This thought is practically
illustrated by the common use of a seal in canning fruit. We may be ever
so careful with fruit in getting it properly prepared for the can, but
if we set it away without the seal, it will not be long until the fruit
is spoiled. It requires the seal to keep the fruit from spoiling. There
is something in the air which, if not excluded, will spoil the fruit.
The use of the seal is to exclude the air.

So it is with our heart. Justification inducts us into Christ;
sanctification purifies our hearts and seals us in him; now when sin
would come in contact with our hearts and defile it, there is something
there, the Holy Spirit, the seal, which keeps sin from entering in. "If
we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with
another and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all
sin."--1 John 1:7. Notice the word "cleanseth." It is in the present
tense. By our walking in the light, which signifies our perfect
obedience continually to all the known will of God, our heart is kept in
line with God's will and hence under the provisions of his grace--the
sin-cleansing blood of Jesus. Thus the perpetual cleansing keeps our
heart pure. By the inwrought work of sanctification we =obtain= this
purity, and by our obedience to God, walking in the light, we =retain=
it.

In this blessed grace, no evil thought can enter our heart unless by our
consent. We have willed it so that we forsake all sin and turn to God;
thus his grace of justification has found its way into our heart. Then
by a definite consecration we willed it so that the cleansing blood of
Jesus should purify our heart from inborn depravity, and his grace of
sanctification has found its way within, and has brought the glorious
heavenly guest, the Holy Spirit, there to abide. Now as we continue to
walk in this light we are kept from sin. By our will we either open or
close our heart toward God. The will is the entrance and door. The grace
of God is free, and more abundant than the sunshine that lights and
warms this earth. All of this sunshine may be kept out of the room if we
will to have it so. We can darken the windows and doors, and keep every
ray of light out, or we can have abundant sunshine if we will, by simply
removing the obstacles. So it is with the illimitable grace of God. If
we open up wide the door of our heart--our will--and keep it open
continually, the grace will flow in and keep out everything that is not
like heaven. "For God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness,
hath shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. But we have this treasure in
earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power may be of God, and not
of us."--2 Cor. 4:6, 7.

If we close the door of our heart toward God, it will be opening it
toward sin, and the result will be darkness. Depravity will at once have
entered in, and then as every evil thought comes into the mind it will
find no obstruction to its way into the heart, where it will find a
fruitful soil in which to germinate and bring forth evil work.


Ques. Does not the word of God say that "from within, out of the heart
of men, proceed evil thoughts," etc.?

Ans. Yes, this is true; but we must consider what kind of heart Jesus is
speaking about. Let us turn to Mark 7. The Pharisees and certain scribes
found fault because they saw some of Jesus' disciples eat bread without
washing their hands; not that their hands were not clean enough to eat
with, but because they did not serve the traditional ceremony, thinking
that thus the hearts of the disciples were defiled, but Jesus explained
that nothing can defile the heart except that which enters into it. Ver.
19. "And he said, That which cometh out of the man, that defileth the
man. For from within, out of the heart of men, proceed evil thoughts,
adulteries, fornication, murders, thefts, covetousness, wickedness,
deceit, lasciviousness, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness: all
these evil things come from within, and defile the man."--Verses 20-23.

We see that this is a true picture of the unregenerated heart, which has
no good thing in it. We also see that it is not an evil thought
presented to the mind from without which defileth the man, but it is the
evil thought that comes from within a corrupted heart. There are two
sources of evil thoughts. 1. The devil himself directly. 2. A corrupt,
unregenerate heart, which is a hotbed and nursery of the devil. From
either of these outward sources evil thoughts may be presented to the
mind of a child of God, but from neither can our hearts be defiled if
they are brought into captivity and banished, as will be the case with
every obedient soul.


Ques. Is not every mistake a sin?

Ans. No; there are many mistakes which are not sinful. There is no doubt
that every sin is a serious mistake, but God's people do not make such
mistakes. The word of God teaches what sin is, and if we abide in Christ
we will not commit sin. The scriptural definition of sin will help us to
understand this. "Therefore to him that knoweth to do good, and doeth it
not, to him it is sin."--Jas. 4:17. "All unrighteousness is sin."--1
John 5:17. "When lust hath conceived it bringeth forth sin."--Jas. 1:15.
"Sin is the transgression of the law."--1 John 3:4. "Whosoever abideth
in him sinneth not."--1 John 3:6. Any mistake that would be a violation
of God's law would be a sin, but aside from this, a simple error in
judgment is not a sin. Salvation does not warrant an experience beyond
the probability of error in our human nature, and Christian perfection
is not infallibility.


Ques. Did not Paul say there was sin dwelling in him?

Ans. Yes. This expression we find in Rom. 7:17. The apostle when writing
this chapter was not describing his sanctified condition. It is a
description of his condition when he was in the flesh, or carnal state.
"For when we were in the flesh, the motions of sin, which were by the
law, did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto death."--Ver. 5.
And in Rom. 8:8, 9 he says, "So then they that are in the flesh cannot
please God. But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be
that the Spirit of God dwell in you." "For the law of the Spirit of life
in Christ Jesus hath made me free from the law of sin and death."--Ver.
2. Paul's condition when under the law is described in the 7th chapter
of Romans. In chapters 6 and 8 he describes the condition of the child
of God under grace.


Ques. But does he not say in Rom. 3:10 that "there is none righteous,
no, not one"?

Ans. Yes. But he was not describing the condition of the child of God
under grace. He refers to the world under the law. No Bible Christian
can conscientiously apply Rom. 3:10-18 to himself.


Ques. How about Solomon, who said, "There is not a just man upon the
earth, that doeth good, and sinneth not"?

Ans. This also was spoken of the condition of the people under the law.
"The law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did
by the which we draw nigh unto God."--Heb. 7:19.

In order to properly apply scripture it is very helpful to always
consider: 1. Who wrote it? 2. When was it written? 3. Of whom or to whom
was it written? In this manner it is easy to determine the meaning of
such scriptures as here have been mentioned and many others, which would
otherwise render it impossible to harmonize the whole word of God. The
two dispensations, the law and grace, are vastly different in many
respects. The first was but the shadow of the second. In the first there
was no power to take away sin, or to change the inward moral condition
of man but in the second there is the power and provision in the
redemption of Christ to save us to the uttermost.


Ques. But did not Paul say of himself when under grace that he kept his
body under and brought it into subjection? Does not this indicate that
his body was yet sinful?

Ans. Let us turn to 1 Cor. 9:25-27. We see here that he makes no
reference to his body being sinful, but tells how he practices
temperance in all things. Like one who prepares himself for a race, in
training himself physically, bringing his body into subjection in
everything, that he may be able to win the prize. In sanctification the
sinful and depraved nature is destroyed, and everything unholy cleansed
out; therefore there are no sinful propensities to be kept down and
under, but all sin is kept out. The sanctified body is not sinful but
holy (1 Cor. 3:17) and is designed for God for the dwelling-place of his
Holy Spirit.

Every propensity and appetite is now restored to its condition of
purity, in which it was created before sin entered into the world, but
yet we are human. Sanctification does not destroy our human nature, but
simply brings it into easy control, with every propensity in harmony
with the design of its Creator. But we are yet in this world and the
creature--our physical nature--is yet subject to vanity.

Satan with all his malicious and crafty devices is lying in wait to
deceive and lead astray. He comes to us and appeals to our physical
nature in many respects, and it is necessary that we keep in a watchful
and prayerful attitude "lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve
through his subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the
simplicity that is in Christ."--2 Cor. 11:3. Even through our appetites
would Satan gain the advantage over us, and finally bring us into
bondage, if he were permitted to do so. In this respect the apostle Paul
kept his body under and brought every appetite and propensity into
subjection to serve him, rather than he should serve them, and all his
ransomed powers were bent upon his faithful obedience to the one object
of his existence--the ministry of the gospel.


Ques. Can a person lose the experience of sanctification?

Ans. Yes, it is possible to lose it.

This experience does not place us beyond temptation. It only fortifies
us more strongly against the world, the flesh, and the devil, and
greatly diminishes the probability of falling.


Ques. Does not the word of God teach that "Whosoever abideth in him
sinneth not"; and "Whosoever is born of God doth not commit sin"?

Ans. Yes; this is certainly true. There is no possibility of sinning in
Christ. It is only when a person gets out of Christ that it is possible
to commit sin. The term "born of God" includes both justified and
sanctified. No justified person can commit sin and retain the justified
experience; therefore, no one who is born of God and retains this divine
relationship in him will sin. Everyone who commits sin must do so
outside of this life in God. The apostle John says, "Whosoever sinneth
hath not seen him, neither known him," which signifies that in the act
of committing sin a person gets entirely outside of Christ. In such an
act he has not seen, nor known him. The apostle also says concerning
those who are born of God, that they "cannot sin," because they are
"born of God." This statement agrees with the one just quoted, and
proves that it is not possible to commit sin in Christ; but it does not
infer that it is not possible to get out of Christ and commit sin. The
expression "cannot sin" simply signifies that there is no disposition in
the heart to commit sin. We are constrained by love to him who gave his
life for us, to do nothing to displease him. We have the privilege and
power to displease him if we will, but we have no will to do so. We
"cannot" do it and abide loyal to him. A mother may be requested to take
a weapon and slay her child, but she at once answers, I cannot! Yea, she
can if she will; but the answer would in every case be repeated "I
cannot!" It is not difficult to see why she cannot do such a deed. She
has no disposition to do so, even though she has the power to do it. Her
love for her child renders it impossible so long as that love continues.


Ques. Can a person be restored to this experience of sanctification if
it should be lost?

Ans. Yes, by complying with the conditions; but the same act of sin
which would cause us to lose our experience of sanctification would also
forfeit our justification, and bring us into condemnation. Therefore the
conditions necessary to get back into Christ would be first, repentance
and faith; then by a definite consecration, or a renewal of our
consecration which has been broken, and a definite faith in the
all-cleansing blood of Christ we will be restored to sanctification.


Ques. In case a person shall unfortunately sustain such a loss, how long
would it take to become restored?

Ans. Just as long as it would take to meet the conditions. No one in
such a case should wait an hour, but knowing just what conditions are
required, they should be complied with at once.


Ques. How can we understand the seventh chapter of Romans to harmonize
with the doctrine of holiness?

Ans. From the seventh verse of this chapter the apostle describes his
experience when under the law, before he had been brought into the grace
of God. From the seventh to the fourteenth verse he speaks of his
experience, making use of the past tense. From the fourteenth verse
through the rest of the chapter he makes use of the present tense, but
still continues the description of his past experience.

It is held by holiness opposers that this chapter is a description of
the apostle's experience under grace, and that this is the highest
possible experience attainable in this gospel dispensation. But such an
experience is not consistent with grace at all. If this were all that
grace can do, there would be no encouragement in it for any one to
accept. No sinner could do worse than the experience described here,
except that he might deliberately choose to sin and do everything wrong.
This chapter describes the sinner as having a desire in his mind to do
right but no power within him to carry out his desires, in any respect.
He is awakened to the requirements of the law of God, but finds he is
held fast by another law which holds him with such power as to render
him helpless, utterly helpless, to do anything good. This does not apply
to the justified experience under grace. It applies perfectly to that
under the law, because the Mosaic law had no other power, nor design,
than to awaken the conscience; and this is just what the apostle here
describes concerning himself "For I was alive without the law once: but
when the commandment came, sin revived, and I died."--Rom. 7:9. He died
in trespasses and sin. This was the condition of all men under the law,
and this is where grace found the world. "Now we know that what things
soever the law saith, it saith to them who are under the law that every
mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before
God."--Rom. 3:19.


Ques. Is every child at birth sinful by nature?

Ans. The race of mankind has descended from Adam through Seth, who was
born not in the image of God as Adam and Eve were created, but in the
image and after the likeness of Adam as he was after the fall. It is
evident that our first parents lost the image of God through their
disobedience, and it is also evident that this image of God has never
been regained through the first Adam. The word of God plainly teaches
that Christ, the second Adam, is the image of God, and by the power of
his redemption grace, he will restore this image to every son and
daughter of Adam's race who will meet the conditions for the same. The
first Adam is depraved and a sad failure. He has no power within himself
to change his moral condition. The second Adam (Christ) is a glorious
success. He possesses all the moral characteristics of purity and
holiness that the first Adam did before the fall, and also has the power
to impart this image of God to all who come to him.

The image of Adam is entailed upon the race through the fall, and
evidently, though mysteriously, affects mankind through the natural law
of generation. The image of God is provided for the race through
redemption in Christ, and is imparted to each individual through the
divine law of regeneration and its accompanying grace. It is compatible
with the word of God, with reason, and with observation, that every
child born into this world through the natural law of generation, very
early in life in a greater or lesser degree manifests some of the
characteristics of this image of Adam. Just how, when, and where the
child partakes of this nature would be a subject of conjecture and
speculation. The psalmist says he was conceived in sin and shapen in
iniquity (See Psa. 51:5.) and according to the condition of the
unregenerate world this is as true today as it was in the days of David.
The innocent child, of course, is not accountable for this inward
condition of its nature, but as it grows to the age of accountability it
becomes an easy prey to the powers of sin because of this condition.
While innocent, it is unquestionably acceptable in the sight of God and
comes under the provisions of the redemption of Christ unconditionally:
for "sin is not imputed where there is no law."--Rom. 5:13. The apostle
says "I was alive without the law once; but when the commandment came,
sin revived, and I died."--Rom. 7:9. He no doubt had reference to the
innocent period of his life. The principle of sin was in his nature, but
"without the law sin was dead"; it had no power to bring him into
condemnation. As soon, however, as he became able to know what the law
required of him, sin revived and made him a transgressor by causing him
to disobey the commands of God. There is no room to question the fact
that sin was in his nature; for he plainly states it so, and the
expression, "sin revived" indicates that it had been in him during the
period of his innocent state.




CHAPTER XIII

Personal Experience


In conclusion I desire to add my humble testimony of a personal
experience of the glorious work of entire sanctification.

At the age of seventeen years I was converted. All who were acquainted
with me had no reason to doubt the genuine, inwrought grace of pardon
and the new life which at once began to bring forth fruit unto God. But
the one to whom this mighty change seemed the most marvelous was myself.
My poor soul, which for several years had been held under the terrible
bondage and darkness of sin, was now turned from darkness unto light and
from the power of Satan unto God, and there was no room either
internally or externally to question that I had received forgiveness of
sins. The glory and blessedness of that sacred hour and that hallowed
spot "when love divine first found me" can never be erased from my
memory. I will not say, as I have often heard others testify of their
own, that my experience was more wonderful than that of anyone else, but
I do not see how it could have been any more wonderful to me than it
was, and it is but useless to make an effort to tell it. All who have
come into this precious life, and have the Spirit bearing witness with
our spirit that we are the children of God, understand what it means to
be justified by faith and have this sweet peace with God through our
Lord Jesus Christ.

But this peace with God meant war with the enemy of my soul, and I soon
learned that the battle was a serious one. The artful schemes of the
enemy were deeply planned for my overthrow, and while attending school
the spirit of the world succeeded in leading me into defeat, and I
decided to yield myself again unto the world, and gave up the struggle
against sin. But oh, what darkness! God only knows what horrors I
suffered. I had been saved but a few months and had had the taste of
true happiness which so spoiled me for the empty pleasures of sin that I
was often so wretched and miserable that life was a burden. But thank
God, this condition of life was only of about two month's duration.
Through the burning tears of my precious mother, which fairly bathed my
face and neck one day as she suddenly came into my room and clasped her
arms around me, I was enabled again to decide for God and heaven. This
decision was so thoroughly burned in upon my soul by those scalding
tears that, by the grace of God, I believe it will last from that day to
my latest breath. The sweet joy and peace of heaven was restored and I
believe I enjoyed salvation as much as anyone could in my circumstances.
I knew I was a child of God, but it was not long until I became fully
conscious that there was a deeper work of grace needed within me. My
parents both professed entire sanctification at the time of the
conversion of the four oldest children, which included myself, but my
life was much occupied in securing an education, and having but limited
opportunities I was absorbed mostly with my studies, then afterward
became engaged in educational work for a number of years. It needed no
arguments to prove that my parents possessed a deeper spiritual life
than I did, and although the doctrine of sanctification was not so
clearly taught and understood then as now, yet I was fully aware this
was what I needed. Sometimes I thought I had obtained the experience,
but soon it was proved by unmistakable evidence that I was not
sanctified. I had not come to the point of a definite and absolute
consecration, and really did not understand how to make this
consecration. My great ambition in life was to make a mark in the world.
This was so deeply implanted within me that I caused every energy to
bend in that direction. I dearly loved God and fully realized my utter
dependence upon him, but my love was not perfected. Then unfortunately I
had a quick temper, which I found justification had not destroyed. It
was materially repressed and generally held under control, but it was
there and needed only the provocation to assert its presence; and
sometimes, I am sorry to say, it brought me under condemnation and I had
cause to repent and regain the sweet peace of God.

But the manner of my life, I believe, as a whole, was such that none of
my most intimate acquaintances had any reason to question the sincerity
of my heart or my profession as a Christian. The one who was most
dissatisfied with my inward condition was myself, and for more than
eight years I knew that a deeper work must be wrought before I could be
satisfied. Oh, how truly I could understand the prayer of David when he
so longed for a clean heart; and had I been brought to the knowledge of
the complete consecration, I might have been living in this blessed
Canaan rest of soul soon after my conversion. But God was good and full
of tender mercy. He carried me along and forgave my defeats and so
lovingly bore with me, even though my heart was divided between him and
some things of this world. I had forsaken all that I had to follow
Jesus, but unconsciously these objects would come between Jesus, the
object of my love, and myself, and thus hinder the perfect communion of
the Holy Spirit. About one year prior to my entering into this perfect
rest, the doctrine of sanctification was quite thoroughly agitated. Some
advocates of the Zinzendorf doctrine produced some strong efforts to
overthrow the doctrine of the second work of grace. I had studied the
scriptures carefully and honestly, and while I did not have the
experience of the second grace myself, I was certain that the one-work
teaching was not correct; for I knew I had received all that my heart
could receive in the grace of pardon, and knew also that I soon found
that I needed just exactly what the term sanctification implies, and
what the dear ones who believed in and were advocating the second work
of grace were testifying to by word and deed.

In the winter of 1883-4, while dear companion and myself were engaged
with some sanctified ones in a protracted meeting, to rescue the
perishing, we were brought as never before face to face with the stern
necessity of more spiritual power and life. We were shown by the Holy
Spirit that there is but one route to the promised land and that is by
crossing the Jordan. Death was inevitable if we would come into this
abundant life. We paused and reflected, looked backward and forward, but
there was no alternative--death was our doom. One day while I was absent
from home, and dear companion was left alone, the Lord spoke to her so
plainly that she had one cherished idol that must necessarily be
sacrificed. It was a God-given blessing, but must be yielded freely to
him. She obeyed and entered into the glory of sanctification. When I
returned home I soon found that the work in her was done. Something
marvelous had been accomplished. It was wonderful what a change. She
told me of the death she had to pass through and I fully realized it.
The divine glory which had come into her heart was unspeakable. She
tried to show me how to die the same death. I was desirous to yield and
cross over with her, but I found a resistance in my will which held me
back. I came to my cherished treasures, some of which were God-given
blessings, but unquestionably the Holy Spirit said they must be yielded
up a burnt offering unto the Lord. My will must become swallowed up into
the will of God completely, even to this death. I said, "Yes, Lord, I
will"; but the yes found a hesitancy. It did not reach the depths of my
heart. I kept saying it over and over--"Yes, Lord"--and tried to get it
deeper every time I said it; but the Lord knew it did not reach the
inmost depths. That was a wonderful day to me, but it was not the day of
my death, as it was of my companion. She told in meeting that evening
what the Lord had wrought. I told what I was trying to say to the
Lord--"Thy will be done."

Time passed by and I still hesitated. I wanted the Lord's perfect will,
but also wanted just a little of my will. I wanted both, but the Lord
showed that I could have but one; and I plainly knew which one, if I was
ever to obtain the grace of sanctification. The life of my companion was
a daily testimony which only added to my trouble. I knew she had what
she never had before. Her life before was all that I ever expected to
find in a true, devoted, Christian woman, but now in some marvelous
manner there was vastly more heaven in her life than before, and the
marked absence of everything unlike heaven. I knew she was sanctified,
and I knew I was not. She had just what I must have, and what my soul
was longing for these years. Oh, why could I not just now say "Yes!"
with my whole heart and die the death and gain the abundant life?
Sometimes I was under such conviction that I felt miserable. I asked God
to forgive me for not yielding up my whole heart as I knew he would have
me do.

       *       *       *       *       *

Weeks and months passed and my attention became absorbed in business and
the cares of life, but these months were more unsatisfactory than all my
previous Christian life, and some of this time I certainly lived on a
very low plane of spirituality, and it is evident that I at last came to
the point where my justification would have been forfeited had I not
gone over and possessed the land. I struggled and suffered sometimes
unutterably. After the struggle was over and I was sanctified I could
look back and see where I had come up to a deep chasm so deep and dark
that I could not see the bottom. It was too wide for me to step across.
On the other side was everything my soul longed for. I could see the
beautiful plane and way of sanctification. My loved ones were walking on
it and rejoicing in its glory. Above the chasm there seemed suspended a
rope securely fastened and strong enough to hold my weight, and it
seemed that I could easily take hold of this rope and by a desperate
effort swing myself across the chasm. I had taken hold of the rope and
was for a long time hesitating about making the leap. The chasm was the
depth I must drop into in order to reach sanctification, but it seemed
awful--so deep and dark, and no assurance that I would ever see life
again. The rope was my will. I had presumed to swing across without
going into the death, but God knew that would not be his way, and there
I stood, gazing with fear and trembling into the immensity of this dark
chasm into which to leap meant certain death. Later I had taken hold of
the rope and swung myself away from where I had been standing, with the
hope of reaching the other side. I could not reach it and now was worse
off than before, for I was now suspended above the chasm and could
neither go back nor go forward. There I was hanging and swinging,
holding on for life, and yet the Holy Spirit kept saying, "Let go."

My sufferings increased until I began to feel that death would be a
relief. At that time God sent a brother to us who preached a sermon from
the text, 1 Peter 4:1, 2, with emphasis upon the clause, "For he that
hath suffered in the flesh hath ceased from sin." The Holy Spirit
applied this to me and revealed to my soul the utter necessity of death
to gain sanctification. The end came, I let go my death grip of the rope
and said as I never said before, "Yes, Lord, thy will be done!" I knew
that it reached the uttermost depth of my soul. God knew it, and I am
certain that Satan knew it. At the close of that meeting I said, "I am
now offered up." There was no conscious change only I knew my will was
yielded, and I am certain that not an atom of earth existed between God
and me. We went home late in the evening, and as I was retiring I knelt
once more before God and simply told him that now after these months of
struggle it was all ended and I was so thankful to him that I could say
so sweetly, "Thy will be done." My hold upon the rope had become so
weary. How sweet and blessed now to rest so securely in that infinite
will. The great chasm was deep and dark, but I was so glad that I had
let go and dropped into it; for I was so conscious now that even in the
darkness and depths I was in his will. As I dropped, loving arms of
Jesus had caught me and I was glad to be in death with him. I felt
within me that something wonderful was about to take place. I arose from
my knees and scarcely had time to lie down when truly I experienced a
taste of death. Wholly unconscious of my earthly surroundings, but
knowing I was in the presence of Jesus, I believe a death was wrought
within me, after which the baptism of pentecostal fire and the Holy
Ghost came upon me. The refining fire went through my very body and the
effect seemed terrible. The sublime consciousness of the presence of
heaven and the majesty of God was such as mortal tongue can never
describe. Then following the distinct baptism of fire the floodgates of
heaven's glory were opened upon me, and, oh, the heavenly deluge that
followed can be realized only by those who have experienced the same.

More than sixteen years have passed since this wonderful event, and
while the emotions of feeling have been varied through the labors and
toils of a busy life (both in business life, and twelve years in the
gospel ministry), I can testify to the glory of God that the power and
victory in this blessed second grace has been all-sufficient. The word
of God, now I found, was full of sanctification, and my new experience
spoiled me for any arguments against the doctrine as a second work of
grace, and in due time I could plainly see that according to the word of
God and the plan of redemption it must be an experience subsequent to
justification. The conscious presence of the indwelling Holy Spirit and
the knowledge of a pure heart in this precious grace is what we need
continually in this battle against the powers of the enemy.

Brother and sister, have you had your Pentecost? If not, tarry at
Jerusalem. "And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly; and I pray
God your whole spirit and soul and body be preserved blameless unto the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Faithful is he that calleth you, who
also will do it."--1 Thess. 5:23, 24.


       *       *       *       *       *


Transcriber's Note

Minor punctuation errors have been corrected without notice. A few
obvious typographical errors have been corrected and are listed below.

Page 3: "The Holy Spirit of Promise" page number changed from "23" to
"25".

Page 8: "It is indispensible" changed to "It is indispensable".

Page 17: "the words "having" signifying" changed to "the word "having"
signifying".

Page 36: "than should no place" changed to "then should no place".

Page 45: "so deeply inbedded" changed to "so deeply embedded".

Page 62: "of ecclestiastical bondage" changed to "of ecclesiastical
bondage".

Page 62: "will in every individaul" changed to "will in every
individual".

Page 63: "throughly furnished unto all" changed to "thoroughly furnished
unto all".

Pages 77-78: "made "perfect his death" changed to "made "perfect" by his
death".

Page 85: "sanctificed condition" changed to "sanctified condition".

Page 90: "Chapter XIV" changed to "Chapter XIII".

Page 95: "no consicous change only" changed to "no conscious change only".





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Sanctification, by J. W. Byers

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SANCTIFICATION ***

***** This file should be named 26691.txt or 26691.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/6/9/26691/

Produced by Charlene Taylor, Carla Foust, Joel Erickson
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
