The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Island House, by F. M. Holmes

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Island House
       A Tale for the Young Folks

Author: F. M. Holmes

Release Date: September 15, 2008 [EBook #26627]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ISLAND HOUSE ***




Produced by Al Haines










[Frontispiece: "I do believe there's Miss Edith at the window!" (p. 25)]






THE ISLAND HOUSE

A Tale for the Young Folks.


BY

F. M. HOLMES,





AUTHOR OF "THE BELL BUOY;" "JACK MARSTON'S ANCHOR;" "THE WHITE SLEDGE,"
ETC.




Publishers

S. W. Partridge & Co., Ltd.

London

1898




_BOOKS IN THE SAME SERIES_

  "ROAST POTATOES!"
  ONLY A GIRL!
  DICK AND HIS DONKEY
  RED DAVE
  THE LITTLE WOODMAN
  A LITTLE TOWN MOUSE
  THE ISLAND HOUSE
  THE CHILDREN OF THE MARSHES
  A DOUBLE VICTORY
  LEFT IN CHARGE
  A SUNDAY TRIP
  "IN A MINUTE!"
  FARTHING DIPS
  TIMFY SYKES


LONDON

S. W. PARTRIDGE & CO, LTD.

MADE IN GREAT BRITAIN.




CONTENTS.


CHAPTER

   I. OLD MANSY HEARS SOMETHING
  II. TO THE LABURNUM TREE
 III. THE YOUNG NAVIGATOR
  IV. "WHAT HAVE YOU HEARD?"
   V. WITH TIED WRISTS
  VI. AN UNWELCOME VISITOR




ILLUSTRATIONS


"I do believe there's Miss Edith at the window!" . . . _Frontispiece_

"Alfy and Mansy made quite an enjoyable meal."

"On floated the tub, leaving him alone in the tree!"

"'I wonder if I could undo these knots with my teeth?  I will try.'"




THE ISLAND HOUSE.


CHAPTER I.

OLD MANSY HEARS SOMETHING.

"I think I'll get out here, young man."

"All right, missus."

The old carrier stopped his jolting cart--an easy thing to do, for the
wearied horse was glad of the chance of halting--and the passenger
leisurely descended.  With her descended also a bulging umbrella and
numerous packages.

"Good night, young man!" she exclaimed.  She thought this a very polite
way of addressing men whom she regarded as somewhat beneath her in
social station.

But he did not answer.  He was urging on his sleepy horse, and though
it was an easy matter to stop that interesting quadruped, yet it was a
very different thing to make him go on again.

So she started off down a road leading out of the turnpike thoroughfare
on which the carrier was travelling.

She was a tall, somewhat angular woman, with determination written on
her face.  In one hand she carried a number of parcels mysteriously
tied together, and in the other hand her very bulgy umbrella, which she
used as a walking stick, and staffed her way with it solemnly along the
dim country road.

It was a summer evening, and there had been a heavy storm during the
day.  "Dear! dear! how dirty it be, sure_ly_," she said, as she
proceeded.  "Bad enough to be dirty in winter, but in summer it's
disgraceful!  Ha! how sweet that woodbine do smell!  Now, if I could
get a piece for the children!"

She stopped and began to poke about in the hedge with her bulging
umbrella.  At last, after much reaching and pulling, she obtained a
small piece of the sweet-smelling honeysuckle, stuck it in her large,
old-fashioned bonnet, where it nodded like a plume, and pursued her way
in triumph.

"Soon be home now," she said, to encourage herself.  "Won't Master Alfy
be pleased with the woodbine!"

Suddenly she paused again.  What was that noise?

She was at the corner of a lane branching off from the road she had
been pursuing.  Dimly in her ears sounded a low, sullen roar--a roar
something like the murmuring noise of a mighty city heard in a quiet
and distant suburb.

But here was no mighty city.  She was deep in the heart of the quiet
country.  What was that noise?

"I never heerd the like afore at this place," she muttered to herself.
"Anyhow, I'll get on home.  I shan't be long now!"

A few turns in the road brought her in sight of the house.  But she
stood suddenly quite still, and stared in amazement and alarm.  Was
that indeed the house she had left quite safely in the smiling sunlight
of yesterday morning?

Now, she saw a turbid sheet of water surrounding it; and here and there
the tops of shrubs and trees and hedges, looking strange and melancholy
as they rose out of the flood.  The dull roar she had heard previously
now sounded louder than before, but she did not think of that.  The
children were her anxiety.  "Where are the children?" she cried.

The excitement and alarm wrought upon her feelings, and she screamed
aloud--

"Children!  children!  Where are the children?"

Perhaps it was the best thing she could have done.  Anyhow, it had a
good effect.  Lights quickly appeared at the windows, and she heard
shrill, childish voices sounding over the water.

"Mansy!  Mansy! is that you?  Oh! we are glad you have come!  Where
does all the water come from?"

"Are you all safe?" she screamed.

"Yes, yes; but we have scarcely anything to eat."

"I have something in these parcels!" she shouted.  "Oh, thank God the
children are all safe!"

"How are you to get here, Mansy?"

That was the difficulty; and Mansy, as she looked at the dull, sullen
water, felt she could not answer the question.  First she thought of
boldly plunging in and wading up to the house door.  But, strong-nerved
as she was, she shrank from this, and after carefully plumbing the
depth a little way with the bulging umbrella, she shrank from it still
more.  It might be too dangerous.

In the dim twilight of that cloudy summer evening she stood on the
water's brink and watched the flood go swaying past.  She felt
stupefied and bewildered.  Whence came the flood, and how?  A more
unexpected thing had never happened to her.  And now she knew that the
children were safe, the unexpectedness of it, the amazement of the
whole thing, seemed almost to benumb her senses.

But she soon roused herself, when across the water sounded a shrill
boyish voice, which shouted--"I'll bring you over, Mansy.  I'm coming
for you.  Look out!"

"Bless the boy! that's my Master Alfy.  Whatever is he up to now?"

And the good woman strained her eyes in the direction of the house to
see what her favourite boy was doing.

She heard numerous childish exclamations, shouts, and laughter, and
noises as of something knocking against the walls of the house.  Then a
splash!

"Whatever is that boy doing?" cried Mansy.  "Don't you get drownded!"
she screamed.  "Do take care, Master Alfy!  I'd rather stay here all
night than you should come to harm!"

"All right, Mansy dear," shouted the shrill voice of the boy.  "I'm
coming, safe and sound, Mansy."

"Now, what is he a-comin' in?" cried the good woman, gazing into the
dusk.  She saw the dim outline of something which soon she recognised.

"Why, bless the boy! he's in the big washing tub!  My! and how clever
he do manage it!"

Mansy was quite right.  The plucky little lad had hit on this expedient
of ferrying the old nurse and housekeeper over the flood to the house!
He had obtained two large kitchen ladles, and with these he was
propelling and guiding the unwieldy round tub, which bobbed about
provokingly on the turbid water, and made but little progress.  It
would have been still less, perhaps, but for the fact that the water
flowed from the direction of the house past the old nurse.

But the difficulty the boy had soon to encounter was to guide the tub
to her, for it was in great danger of being carried past.  The house
stood in a small valley or depression of ground, which rose to the lane
up which Mansy had been walking.  She was now standing on the verge of
the water, which appeared to surround the house entirely, and
completely obliterated the lawn and garden, except for the trees and
shrubs, and the boundary hedge which stood above the turbid flood.

"Now, Mansy, look out!" cried Alfy.  And whirling through the air came
a thin rope, which, before she was aware, struck her shoulder.

"Oh!" she exclaimed, "what's that?  What are you doing, Alfy?"

"Catch tight hold of it--quick, Mansy!"

Mansy's energy and common-sense were returning, and she was on the
alert in a moment.  She caught the rope, and held it firmly.  "The new
clothes line!" she exclaimed, "Bless the boy! what next?"

"Pull, Mansy dear, pull!" he shouted.  She pulled hard, and the tub
slowly floated towards her.

"That's right; jolly!" exclaimed Alfy, as the tub, with its bright,
brave little burden, came close to Mansy and touched the ground before
her.

"My dear boy," exclaimed the good old woman, "how did this water
happen?  And I am so glad to find you all well."

"Yes, all right, Mansy.  Now get in the tub, quick!  Is it not fun?"

"What! me get in the washing-tub?" she exclaimed.  "Oh!  I couldn't!"

"Why, yes, Mansy dear; that's what I came for.  You'll be all right."

"Why, it wouldn't bear me!  We should go to the bottom."

"Oh! nonsense, Mansy!  Why, don't you remember at the seaside regatta,
last year men had a race in tubs?"

"Ah! but I'm--I'm--heavier than them men," said Mansy thoughtfully,
looking down on her ample proportions.

"The tub is big," exclaimed Alfy.  "It is the biggest we have.  We had
a work to get it out of the window; and it made such a splash!  Come
on, dear Mansy!"

"I wouldn't do it for nobody but you, Master Alfy!"

"Well, do it for me then, Mansy.  I'll take care of you; see if I
don't."

"Anyhow, the parcels might go in.  There's something there nice,
Alfy,--a tongue--a nice Paysandoo; and some jam--blackberry and apple
mixed, and some biscuits."

"Oh! jolly! treat!  Come on, dear Mansy, let's be quick back."

"Has not the butcher come?" asked the old nurse.

"No; no tradesmen could cross over from the village, nor yet the
postman, and we expected a letter from mother and father.  We are all
surrounded by water in the house, just like an island.  'The Island
House' Madge called it!"

"And Miss Madge, and Miss Edie, and Jane are quite well?"

"Yes, quite, dear Mansy.  Only do be quick, please."

The old nurse bent over and put the packages into the tub.

"There!" she said, as it dipped, "see how that weighs it down."

"Only a bob down when the parcels fell in," Alfy cried merrily.  "See,
it is all right now.  You can't get across any other way," he added
decidedly.

"Well, I'll try it," she said slowly; "but I very much doubt----"

She did not finish the sentence, but carefully planting the bulging
umbrella in the water, she leaned on it, and then advanced one foot to
place in the tub.  "Oh, I can't!" she cried, just as the foot was over
the side of the tub, and she hastily drew back.

"You _could_, Mansy dear," exclaimed Alfy.  "You were just doing it
beautifully!"

"But didn't you see how the tub was going down, Master Alfy?"

"Oh, no, it wasn't; try again, there's a dear!"

So Mansy, persuaded by Alfy, whom she loved like her own son, and
spurred on also by the desire to reach the house, tried again.  She
leaned on the umbrella, and slowly advanced her right foot as before,
but this time she plumped it down into the tub.

Down it bobbed, of course, under her weight.  "Oh-h-h!" she cried.  "I
shall drown you, Alfy!" and hastily she drew back again.  "Me in a
tub!" she cried.  "I can't!"

"It really is all right," said Alfy again.  "It will take us both.
Why, these flat-bottomed things float in ever such a little water.  Try
once more, Mansy dear, and then I can give you a kiss."

"I dessay you could, my bonnie baby, and I know you'd do anything to
help your old nurse.  You're a real good boy; but go in that rockety
thing I couldn't!"

"Tisn't rickety, Mansy, when once you are inside.  Look here," and he
jumped in it, and shook it from side to side.  Of course his light
weight was nothing to speak of, and it sat like a cork on the water.

"You take over the parcels to your sisters, Alfy dear, and then they'll
have something to eat."

"No, I'm not going without you, Mansy!" he exclaimed decidedly, pulling
the tub in again by the rope quite close.

"Bless the boy!  To think of my little Master Alfy taking his old nurse
in a tub!  What would your parients say, on the Continong?"

"Well, it must be, you see, Mansy dear, so please come on!"

"Well, if we do turn over, I'll save you, Master Alfy.  So now I'll try
again."

And once more leaning on the umbrella, she put one foot into the tub,
and not caring for its plumping down into the water, this time she
quickly brought the other foot after the first.

"Capital! capital!" cried Alfy.  "There, you see, we have not gone
over!"

No, they had not gone over; but he soon found they were not going at
all!  The tub was just aground, and would not move without being pushed
off.

So Alfy endeavoured to edge off the clumsy craft with the ladles, and
called on Mansy to help with the indispensable bulgy umbrella.  The
moon was now shining, and albeit it was with a wan and watery gleam,
yet it enabled them to see their course a little more clearly.

After strenuous efforts, the large, round tub was gradually got off the
ground, and actually floated.  "Hurrah!" shouted the brave little Alfy.
"Now for Island House!"

But try as he would he could not make the heavily laden craft float
towards the house.  His paddles were too small, or he had not power
enough to make the best use of them, and slowly the current bore him
away.

Then he called on Mansy to help, but, good woman, she no more knew how
to paddle a tub properly than to fly to the moon!  Their efforts
perhaps slightly retarded the progress of the strange craft, but could
not alter its course.

"I'll try the rope," cried Alfy in desperation.  "Madge!  Jane!" he
shouted, "look out!"

He threw the rope, but, of course, it fell far short of the house.  A
moment's reflection would have shown him that it could not possibly
reach the window where stood his sisters and the servant maid.

They saw the difficulty now, and screamed aloud, while Mansy
endeavoured to shout back reassuring answers.

"It's no use," said Alfy, crouching down in the tub, "we are floating
away.  We cannot get to the house.  What shall we do now?"




CHAPTER II.

TO THE LABURNUM TREE.

"What shall we do now?"

It was Mansy who echoed Alfy's cry.  "Can't we stop it somehow, Master
Alfy?" she added.  "Tie it with the rope to the top of some tree or
something.  Look there, could we not catch the line on there?" and she
pointed to the shrubby top of a big bush or tree.  Alfy could not
exactly see what it was, but he saw something jutting up above the
water.

The boy hastily took up his ladles, and endeavoured to steer the
strange bark to the point indicated.  It was a weary, troublesome task.
Then Mansy threw the line, trying to catch it in the branches, and
nearly overbalanced herself into the water.

"The rockety thing!" she exclaimed, half in alarm and half in contempt.
"I feared it 'ud go over."

"It's all right, Mansy, if you sit still," said Alfy; "but try and
paddle it with the umbrella to the tree."

So they both endeavoured to float it in the desired direction, and at
length Alfy thought he might venture to throw the rope.  He did so, and
with some good effect, for it fell over a branch, and, though it did
not wind tightly round and had no firm hold, he could just give the tub
a bias in that direction.

After plying his paddles with fairly good result for a little time, he
drew in the rope, and again launched it forth at the tree top.  Again
he was, to some extent, successful, and in a few minutes he was able to
float the tub in among the branches.

"Here we are!" he cried, "quite like the baby in the nursery
rhyme--'Hush-a-bye, baby, on the tree top,' you know, eh, Mansy dear?
Now we will tie the tub firmly to the branches, so that there will be
no fear of floating away!"

"You have managed well, Master Alfy," said Mansy, admiringly.

"Oh, but it was your idea; and look, we are not so very far from the
house!"

"I wish we were there!" sighed Mansy.

"So do I," said Alfy, "but, Mansy dear, I really am very hungry, and
you said you had something to eat in those packages!"

"And so I have," replied his old nurse.  "Dear boy, you must be hungry.
I suppose the girls have something left?"

"Oh yes, quite enough for another meal, I should think!  I wish we
could let them know we are safe, and not so very far away."

"Burn a light; I have some matches and a little spirit lamp.  I bought
it with some other things yesterday, thinking it might be handy in the
summer, when the kitchen fire was out, to boil a little water."

"Oh, what fun!" cried Alfy.  "We are just like wrecked sailors or
something, near a desert island!  We'll burn some of the papers round
the parcels to make a great flare."

So the lamp was lit, and the papers burned, and Alfy waved the flimsy,
flaming torch bravely for a minute or so, that the watchers in the
island house might just catch a glimpse of them and of their position.

An answering light was soon flashed back by the girls, so they knew
that their own had been seen.

"Now we will take some of this tongue," said Mansy, producing the tin
in which it was preserved, "Lucky I got the young man in the shop to
open it.  But what about a knife to cut it?"

"Won't this do?" asked Alfy, producing his pocket-knife.  "At all
events, it is better than nothing."

"Why, bless the boy! so it is; but I am afraid it won't do very well.
Howsomdever, we'll make the best of it!"

"Perhaps I can manage it better than you, Mansy," suggested Alfy.  "I
am more used to it, you know; and really it is a splendid knife when
you know how to use it."

"Yes, I should think so, _when_ you know how to use it, my dear, but I
cannot do very much with it in cutting nice slices!"

"Oh, never mind the nice slices, if we can get some nice mouthfuls,"
laughed the boy.  And he proceeded to cut some small slips off the top
of the tongue with great facility, considering the unsuitability of the
small pocket-knife for the purpose.

"Capital!" cried his nurse, as Alfy handed her a few of the small
slices, and then she produced some biscuits, and Alfy and Mansy made
quite an enjoyable meal.

[Illustration: "ALFY AND MANSY MADE QUITE AN ENJOYABLE MEAL."]

"I wish this water was fit to drink," she said, "for I feel thirsty.
Now tell me where it comes from, if you can, and how the flood
happened?"

"It was yesterday afternoon," replied Alfy.  "About three o'clock we
suddenly heard a loud noise, and then the water came rushing all round
the house and into the lower rooms too!  We were frightened and
surprised at first, I can tell you!"

"I expect you were," replied Mansy sympathetically.  "And all in the
lower rooms.  Oh, mercy on us, what a to-do!  Is the mill-dam broke, do
you think?"

"I don't know, Mansy.  I'm not sure if it came that way.  Have some
more tongue, Mansy dear?  It's jolly!"

"Thank you," exclaimed Mansy; "I don't mind if I do, Master Alfy.
Well," she continued, as she took out some more biscuits, "if anybody'd
told me this morning that I should have had my supper to-night in a
washin' tub on the water I'd 'a said they was cracked!"

"And so should I," said Alfy.  "Still, here we are, Mansy; and the next
question is how long shall we be obliged to stay?"

"Yes, indeed," she sighed; "that is the question, and one we can't
answer!"

"We must make the best of it," he said bravely.  "I think I could swim
to the house and drag the tub by the rope."

"I wouldn't hear of it for the world, Master Alfy," protested his
nurse; "you'd catch your death!"

"Perhaps I could walk in the water," he replied.  "I don't believe it
is very deep.  Try it, dear Mansy, with your umbrella, and see how deep
it is."

"I wouldn't let you, Master Alfy; I wouldn't indeed.  You'd catch your
death, I tell you!"

"But we can't stay here all night, Mansy."

"I can't let you get into the water, Master Alfy.  You don't know how
deep it is, nor how strong it's a-runnin'; and you'll catch your death!"

"What dreadful disasters!" laughed Alfy.  But he knew quite well that
his nurse could make up her mind firmly, and that it would be useless
to argue with her.  Still he thought he might have tried to get the
boat nearer the house.

The moon was now shining brightly, and a beautiful silvery path of
light lay on the water.  Alfy sat on the side of the tub opposite his
nurse and watched the scene.  It was a strange picture--the
unaccustomed flood, the dark mass of the house, and the tree tops
standing out of the water, the bright moonlight, which seemed to make
the scene almost more desolate, and the curious craft in which they
were sitting.  The scene deeply impressed itself on Alfy's mind.

"Well, it is of no use to sit here doing nothing," said Mansy
presently.  "If we cannot do anything else, I think we'll try and go to
sleep.  I am so tired.  Perhaps we can see better in the morning what
to do."

"How funny to sleep in a tub on the water!" exclaimed Alfy.

"Yes, and all through me," said Mansy; "I am sorry.  If you had not
come for me you might have been in your own nice warm bed!"

"Oh, never mind me, Mansy; I could not leave you there all night."

"I might have walked to the village."

"It's all right, dear Mansy, I'm happy enough.  Let us snuggle down and
get to sleep."

And so after they had said their prayers, and thanked God for His
preserving care, they made themselves as comfortable as they could in
their strange, cramped quarters, and actually began to doze a little.

But it was an uneasy slumber, and presently Alfy awoke and found the
moon shining full on his face.  The light was also bright on the
hedgetop surrounding the garden of the house; and the idea darted into
his mind that if he could but get the tub beside the hedge he could
work it along toward the house by pushing the paddles against the
hedgetops or pulling at them one after the other.

No sooner thought of than begun.  He glanced at Mansy, but she, good
woman, greatly wearied by the events of the day, was still slumbering,
if her uneasy doze could be so described.  So he commenced quietly to
cast off the rope from the branch.  "If I can but manage it, how nice
it would be for Mansy to wake up and find herself at the house," he
said.

So the plucky little fellow pushed the tub from the embrace of the
branches once more into the flow of the flood; but this time, instead
of attempting to stem the stream and struggle to the house, he sought
to guide the drifting of his clumsy little bark towards a hedge leading
up to the one surrounding the grounds of the house.

It was a difficult task, but not so difficult or so hopeless as
endeavouring to reach the house by paddling direct up to it against the
flood.  Presently he was near enough to throw the rope to the hedge.
Once! twice! thrice he threw it, before he was able to guide the tub at
all by its aid.  Then progress was slow at first, but at length the
rope was twisted firmly round some branches, and he was able to pull
the tub along hand over hand quite quickly.

Once beside the hedge, his task was comparatively easy.  By pulling at
some of the branches, one after the other, he was able to urge his
strange craft along, and soon he had reached the point in the hedge
nearest the building.  Then he paused to consider.  Clearly it was of
no use to continue beside the hedge.  That would only lead him round
the house, but not to the house itself.

So he looked out for the nearest object to which he could throw the
rope.  Now, on the little lawn grew a rather tall laburnum tree.  "If,"
thought Alfy, "I could fasten my rope round that, I could soon pull the
tub up to it."  After considering a few minutes he took the tin in
which the tongue had been brought, and fastened it firmly to the end of
the rope.

"This will make it easier to throw," he said, "and the tin will be more
likely to become entangled in the branches or twist round them."

His plan was successful.  After three or four ineffectual efforts the
tin was caught firmly in the branches, and he commenced to haul the tub
quite close to the tree.

Then another difficulty presented itself.  How should the tin be
disentangled?  He soon found that it could not be done from his
position in the tub, for he could not reach it in any way; so he
whipped out his knife ready to cut the rope.

"Why, bless the boy! where are we?"

Mansy was wide awake now.  In his efforts to reach the tin he had
shaken the tub a good deal and aroused her.

"Oh, Mansy, I hoped you would have slept till I got you up to the
house!" he said.

"Me asleep in a washin' tub! think of that!  Well, I was that dead
tired I could have slep' anywheres, I do believe.  But however did you
get here, Master Alfy?"

"Worked along by the hedge, Mansy."

"You are a brave, clever boy, Alfy!  And I do believe there's Miss
Edith at the window with a light."

"Are you there?" cried a bright, fresh, girlish voice.

"At the laburnum tree," answered Alfy.

"Oh!  Do be quick," answered Edie.  "We are so hungry.  All the bread
and butter and things that were left are spoiled by the water.  And we
have nothing to eat!"

"And we have not much," said Mansy; "the sitiwation is really getting
serious!"




CHAPTER III.

THE YOUNG NAVIGATOR.

"The first thing is to get up to the house," said Alfy.  "I shall have
to jump into the water and wade, after all, Mansy."

"I couldn't permit it, Master Alfy, indeed I couldn't!" replied his
nurse decidedly.

Alfy knew that when Mansy used that word "permit," her mind was very
much made up indeed.  It was one of her rare words, used only on great
occasions and when much emphasis was intended.

"Well, how are we to get to the house?" he said.  "Let us consider.
Oh, I know!" he exclaimed in a few moments.  "Good idea! a jolly dodge!"

"Can you get my bow and arrows, Edie?" he shouted, "and my kite string?"

"What for?"

"To shoot the string to us," he replied.  "Unwind it, and tie one end
to the arrow just above the feathers, and see if you can't shoot it to
us."

"Don't hit us!" screamed Mansy.

Then the girls with the candle-light disappeared from the window, and
the boy and the old nurse were left in the tub to await events.

"What a long time the girls are!" he exclaimed presently.  "I expect
they cannot find the things."  The girls were not really so long as
appeared to the wearied watchers in the moonlight; but at length Edie
and her sister, with Jane, the servant-maid, showed themselves again at
the window.

"Ah! they've got the bow and arrows," said Mansy.

"Look out," cried Madge, "I don't want to hurt you."  And Alfy and
Mansy covered their faces and screwed themselves down in the tub as
well as they could, the irrepressible Alfy laughing meanwhile, and
saying he did not think they need take such great precautions.  Mansy,
however, was rather fidgety about it.

"If the arrow did get into your eyes, you know, Master Alfy, I should
never forgive myself!" she said.

"But I should like to peep and see how Madge does it, you know," argued
Alfy.

"Now, I'm going to shoot," screamed Madge.  She shot; and the arrow
fell midway between the house and the boat.

"Ha! ha! ha!" laughed the boy outright "To think of making all that
fuss for nothing."  Then he cried aloud, "Pull the arrow back quick,
Madge, and raise the bow higher when you shoot again; draw the
bowstring back as far as you can."

"And tie some more string to the kite line if it is not long enough,"
cried Mansy.

So with much laughter from the girls they pulled the arrow back from
the water by the string attached to it and tried again.  They were not
expert archers, and failed once more--failed indeed several times.  But
at last the arrow fell quite near the tub, and Alfy called out to his
sisters not to draw it back as it floated closer, and then with the
help of the handle of Mansy's bulgy umbrella he pulled it in and of
course the kite string with it.

This string was of great length.  Alfy was fond of kite flying, and by
adding together long pieces of string he had acquired a tether of
considerable extent.  To lengthen it still more, however, the girls had
managed to find some more string, and so it came about that
communication was established between the inhabitants of the house and
the watchers in the tub.

"That thin string will never pull us along," said Mansy doubtfully.
"It'll break!"

"Not if we help, I hope," exclaimed Alfy cheerfully.  "We must paddle
our hardest, so the strain on the line won't be so great."

"Don't pull yet," he cried; "not till I tell you, Edie."  Then he cut
the tub free from the laburnum, and, pushing the umbrella hard against
the trunk of the tree, gave the tub a vigorous push in the direction of
the house; and while it was floating thither, he called out to the
girls to pull the string lightly, and commenced to paddle at the same
time.  Mansy also endeavoured to help with her inseparable umbrella,
and so now all of them were endeavouring to persuade the heavily laden
and clumsy craft to float against the flood to the house.

It was a tiresome task.  The young navigator was obliged to go very
slowly, and to constantly ask his sisters not to pull hard, lest the
string should break.  The vigorous push-off had given them a good
start, and they made a little progress.

Once the string broke, but Alfy was able to fish up the line, for it
was near, and Mansy knotted the broken ends together again.  He now
began to be more expert with his improvised paddles, and the string
just kept tight, but with scarcely any strain upon it, yet prevented
the tub from "wobbling"--steered it in fact to the house, and helped to
counteract the flow of the water.

So gradually they progressed to the house.  The moon was now declining,
and a dark hour before the early dawn was at hand.

"How I'm going to get inside that house I don't know!" ejaculated Mansy
at last, after surveying the front for some little time.  "I can't get
through the door--that would let the water in,--and climb to the upper
part of that winder, I couldn't!"

"Oh, we'll manage it, dear Mansy, somehow, never fear!  We are getting
through our difficulties splendidly!"

But when they did get the tub safe under the window--which was
accomplished at last--and Alfy had expressed his joy with a loud
hurrah, then the new difficulty presented itself in full force.  They
were afraid to open the lower sash of the window, as the level of the
water was just above it.

"How am I to scramble over the upper sash?" she exclaimed; "and how am
I to get down on the other side?"

"Yes! and the room is full of water," cried Edie from the window above.

"Not full, Edie!" expostulated Alfy.

"Well, there is a great deal all over the floor, and in all the lower
rooms," explained his sister.

"Oh! dear me! what a mess to clear up," exclaimed Mansy.

"Let me get in and see," said Alfy sturdily.

"Do take care, and don't cut yourself with the glass!" Mansy cried, as
she saw him clambering up over the top sash of the window.  This he had
first pulled down as far as he could, and he also helped himself by the
sash lines.  The breaking of the glass might of course prove very
dangerous, but he found another difficulty when, having climbed over
the sash, he stood a-tiptoe on the bottom of the window frame inside
the room, and clung for support to the top sash.  How was he to
descend?  Inside the room was dark, but he thought he saw the gleam of
water.  He hesitated to jump at hazard, not knowing where he might
alight.

"Lower a candle, Edie," he cried, "and then I can see my way better!"

So presently down came a lighted candle, bobbing to and fro as the
little sister lowered it.  Alfy caught it with one hand and held it
inside the room.  "Oh! what a mess," he exclaimed, as he saw the water
all over the apartment, with teapot cosy, music, papers, wool-mats, and
all kinds of well-known pleasant household things floating despondingly
on its muddy surface.

"What shall we do?" cried Mansy from the outside.  "Oh! help me to get
indoors, so that I can clear up a bit!"

"I don't see yet how I am to get down, Mansy.  The table is too far off
for me to jump to it, and the water seems high!"

"Oh! you mustn't get in the water, Master Alfy!" shrieked poor Mansy,
"Oh, I am so tired of this rockety old washin' tub!  Can't you get me
out, Alfy dear?"

"I'll get you out, Mansy, somehow, never fear," assented Alfy cheerily.
"Now, Edie dear, can you let down a chair and some hassocks for me to
stand on?"

And the busy girls above tied string to the back of a chair and
carefully lowered it, and some hassocks followed.

Alfy soon placed the chair in the room and piled the hassocks on it.
Then lightly stepping on to them, he was able to make his way to the
table, and also to the sideboard.  Next, by means of chairs and
hassocks he made his way to the staircase, and, having hastily mounted
it, put his head out of the nearest upstairs window and shouted,
"Hullo, Mansy!"

"Oh! bless the boy!" exclaimed Mansy with a start.  "You have got up
there, have you?  I do wish I was safe up there, too, Alfy!"

"You soon will be, Mansy," he replied cheerily.

"Oh! we are glad you've come," cried his sisters, as he met them and
kissed them.  "But how are we to get Mansy up?  She can never climb in
through the window!"

"She'd fall in the water," remarked Jane, "and there would be a pretty
to-do!"

"Do you think we could pull the tub up with Mansy in it to the window?"
asked Alfy.

"It would be very heavy," suggested Jane.

"And Mansy might fall out," exclaimed the younger sister, with eager
face and wide-open eyes.

"The distance is not very great," remarked Alfy, as he leaned out of
the window and looked down.  "And it is less still, of course, up to
the top sash of the window, where I got in.  Oh!  I know," he added
joyfully; "we will push the table in the downstairs room close to the
window and put a chair on it, and then, if we can pull Mansy up to the
same level, she can creep in over the sashes of the window, on to the
chair."

"Oh! that will be delightful," said the girls.  But, at first, Mansy
would not hear of it.  Poor Mansy! her ideas of dignity had been sadly
disturbed this evening.  "Me pulled up in a washin' tub?" she
exclaimed.  "The idea! the very idea of such a thing!  And I know you'd
let me fall!"

"If we did, it wouldn't hurt you," said Alfy, "because the tub would
float, you know.  Come on, Mansy, it's the only way I can see!"

She suffered herself to be persuaded by Alfy, and to yield to the logic
of circumstances.  So she fastened the piece of clothes-line that was
left in the tub firmly through its two handles, and Alfy, with the
girls, went downstairs, and, standing on chairs and hassocks, managed
to push the table close up to the window, through which they expected
Mansy to enter.  Then a chair was placed upon it, so that she could
creep in with comparative ease.

The next thing was more difficult.  It was to haul up the tub a little
way with Mansy in it.  By tying a piece of thin kite string to the end
of the rope, they were able easily to pull up the rope from Mansy, and
then they turned it round the bed-post, and all four pulled hard
together.  Mansy herself helped very much by pushing the paddles
against the window ledge; and presently they felt that the tub was
slowly moving.

"Hurrah!" cried Alfy, "we shall do it!"

"Oh! it's off the water, and swinging about; do be careful!" cried
Mansy.

"Steady it against the wall," cried Alfy.  "Pull away, Jane; pull,
Edie; now, all together!"

And so with pulling and shouting, and with Mansy also doing her best to
help, for she was thoroughly determined to enter the house this time,
if possible, they raised the tub.

But just as she was preparing to creep in the window--either the
children relaxed their efforts, or they were not aware of the necessity
of holding the rope very tight when not pulling--suddenly, down went
the tub, splash!

"Oh! oh! oh!" cried Mansy, "I shall be drowned."

The children rushed to the window terror-stricken.  But they soon
found, to their great relief, that Mansy was more frightened than hurt,
and in fact was not hurt at all, though much splashed with water.

"Oh, I thought the rockety thing was going down," she cried; "it went
down pretty far."

"But it's all right, Mansy," said Alfy cheerfully; "and now, we'll try
again, and keep tight hold this time!"

Mansy was very frightened, but eventually she did try, and all working
away for the same object, she did at last manage to clamber in on the
chair, and pick her way on chairs and hassocks over the water to the
stairs.

Oh! what kissings and congratulations there were, when she found
herself safe and sound, once more, with all the children!

      *      *      *      *      *

Next morning the difficulty of providing food presented itself, as they
knew it would.  They had barely enough for one good meal.  And as they
scanned the watery scene around the house, there seemed no sign, and
but little likelihood of any person coming to them from the village.

"I must go in the tub to the nearest land," said Alfy, "and then run to
the village.  I shall not be long."

"What! go in that rockety thing again, Alfy?"

"Why, yes, Mansy.  You see it will be lighter with only one in it.  And
I will take the line and rope.  Oh!  I shall manage."

And so he pushed off.  The flood was still flowing, and carried him
quickly away from the house.  He guided the tub to the laburnum tree,
where a piece of the rope was still hanging.  "I will get that rope,"
said he, and twisting a piece of the line in the tub round the tree, he
climbed up.  He found his task more difficult than he had supposed, but
when he had succeeded and was about to descend, behold! to his
amazement and chagrin the line had become loose, and the action of the
water was just floating the tub away out of his reach.

He made a desperate endeavour to save it by trying to throw into it the
tin which was still attached to the rope in the tree.  But it missed;
and on floated the tub, slowly, but provokingly, bobbing about in the
morning sunshine, leaving him alone in the tree!

[Illustration: "ON FLOATED THE TUB, LEAVING HIM ALONE IN THE TREE!"]




CHAPTER IV.

"WHAT HAVE YOU HEARD?"

What was to be done now?

"This is a greater bother than any of the others," said Alfy.  "I
expect I shall have to wade or swim now, if I can.  Then I must run to
the village in my wet things.  But how shall I get back to the house?
Bother the tub, I say!  However did it get loose?"

The reason was that he had not fastened it very firmly; but then he did
not expect he would be so long in the tree, nor did he think the
current of the water would have such influence.

But the tub had gone, and he must do the best he could without it.
From his perch in the tree he could obtain a clear view of the flood.
The muddy water glistened in the bright sunshine, as though trying to
look pleasant.

The house was, as we have said, in a hollow, or depression of the
ground, and the flood, Alfy could see distinctly, came from some way
behind the house, and flowed round and past it; but whence it came, or
whither it went, he could not discover.

"It can't come from the river," he said thoughtfully, "for that is in a
different direction.  I cannot imagine what causes it."

Sundry things he noticed were floating on its surface.

Here was a quantity of hay, sailing slowly and solidly along in a
fairly compact mass; farther on a little yellow straw flashed in the
sunshine; not far off again pieces of wood floated; and then, curiously
enough, a little tin hand-bowl bobbing about quite pertly, as it was
borne along.  That tin bowl gave him an idea.

"I know!" he cried; "I will ask Mansy and Edie to send off the old tin
bath to me from the house."

Thereupon he shouted loudly to attract their attention.

At first they did not answer, and he could hear various sounds,
indicating that Mansy was endeavouring to repair some of the mischief
done by the flood.  "They are busy," he said, and again he cried,
louder this time than before.

His shouts attracted Edie's attention, and she hastened to the window,
where her exclamation of surprise soon brought the others.  "Bless the
boy!" exclaimed Mansy, "however did he get there?  Where's the tub?"

"Can you send me the old bath?" he cried.

The girls disappeared hastily from the window, and Mansy cried again:
"You are never going to get into that bath, Master Alfy, sure_ly_!"

"Oh!  I can manage it," he replied briskly, "if you can send it down to
the tree.  Tell them to put a pole or something in it, dear Mansy, for
me to paddle it with."

"You must be quick, Alfy, and get us some provisions," urged Mansy, "or
I don't know what we shall do.  We shall get starved!"

Alfy laughed in the gaiety of his heart.  He was a merry, cheerful,
plucky little lad, who could not talk religion, but strove to act it.
Nelson's grand words, "England expects every man to do his duty," was
his motto, unexpressed though it was.

"Never fear, Mansy," he cried, "I'll be back in good time.  You shall
have plenty to cook and eat to-day!"

Then Mansy disappeared from the window, and Alfy soon heard sounds, as
though the bath were being brought along.  It was a somewhat
high-backed sitz bath, which had seen some service in the family.

Splash!

Over it went from the window, and of course it fell bottom-upwards!

"Ah-h-h!" he cried, "what a mull!  Now I shall have to wait here a long
time till it is righted.  Take care, please; don't let it float away!"
he shouted.

He soon saw that quick-witted Edie had hastened below to the table,
which had remained as it was placed last evening, and stretching out of
the window with a broom, which was the handiest and most efficient
thing she could readily find, was holding the bath to the house.

In answer to Alfy's cries, Mansy went down to help Edie, and then the
others following, they all endeavoured to turn the bath top upwards.
This task they at length accomplished, with the help of one or two more
brooms; and having fastened string round it to prevent its escape, it
was launched with a vigorous push in Alfy's direction.  It floated
pretty buoyantly on the water, though its high back seemed to make it a
little top-heavy.

Well was it that the strange craft had been tethered, or it might have
floated provokingly just out of Alfy's reach; but, with a little
pulling and guidance by means of the string, it was coaxed near enough
to Alfy, so that he could throw in his tin with the cord attached, and
persuade it to float right under the tree.

In a very short time he had cautiously descended and dropped into his
novel boat.  Yes, it floated still, though his weight caused it, of
course, to sink deeper in the water.  Perhaps, however, it was less
liable to overturn, for its load ballasted it, and rendered it less
top-heavy.

With a loud "Hurrah!" he pushed off smartly from the tree, and giving
one wave of the hand to those watching him from the house, turned his
attention to navigating his strange craft to the shore.

Now, for a paddle Edie had put in a long broom-handle, and grasping
this in the middle, he plied it alternately one side and then the other.

Strange use for a broom-handle; but the occupants of the Island House
never expected to be caught by a flood like this, so they had to do the
best they could.  "Hullo!  I must look out for that mass of hay!" said
Alfy.  "That I shall call an iceberg; or, no, a whale I think.  Out of
the way, whale!" he cried, pushing it off briskly with his
indispensable broom-handle.

Hard though he worked, he made but slow progress, his craft was so
unwieldy and difficult to manage.  "I wonder where the tub is!" he
cried.  "Why, actually there, stranded against the hedge!  The tub was
better than the bath.  I've a good mind to go after that tub and bring
both to land."

And this the plucky little fellow accomplished.  He was becoming quite
expert in the use of the paddles, and, of course, as soon as he came to
the hedge-top, he was able to propel the bath along more quickly.  He
fastened the tub and bath together, and then transferring himself to
the former, set to work to bring both to the bank.  He found it a
difficult task, but he persevered, and in a short time was successful.
At last he leaped on dry land.  With a triumphant shout, he attracted
the attention of Mansy and his sisters to his success, and then, after
firmly mooring his fleet--as he called the tub and the bath--he set off
quickly for the village.

Now, his way led him soon beside a tall hedge.  And, as he was
hastening along, he became aware of voices on the other side.  At first
he paid little attention, but then a word or two about the flood struck
his ear.  "If I could see them," he said, "I would ask how it was
caused."  But--what was one voice saying?

"If I told what I knew about your neglecting your duty, you would catch
it hot, I can tell you."

"But you won't tell, I'm sure," replied the other.

"I don't know so much about that."

"I didn't mean to," whined the other.

"Didn't mean to!  Of course you didn't.  Still you did it.  And this
here ter'ble flood is the result.  You was in drink, you know you was;
and you was careless, and didn't do your dooty.  You ought to have
watched, and given the alarm, and the banks might have been mended, and
the flood saved."

Alfy heard every word distinctly.  There was an opening in the hedge a
little farther on, and the voices seemed to be going towards it, even
as he was himself.

"Who'd have thought," said the second man apologetically, "that that
stout wall would have burst."

"You may be thankful it didn't burst the other side," answered the
first man, "and the water flooded Tarn'ick.  It's bad enough as it is,
coming to the village; but it would have been very much worse then."

So this was the cause of the flood.  The reservoir which supplied the
populous town of Tarnwick had burst, and its contents had poured down
towards the village.  And had the village suffered at all?  Alfy was
anxious to know.  And how had the man neglected his duty, and caused
the flood?

The lad was now near the opening in the hedge, and he suddenly, but
distinctly, saw the two men whom he had heard talking.  He did not
recognise either of them; but, at sight of him, they started in
surprise, and stopped at once, and looked at him strangely, as though
to ask what he had heard.

Alfy walked straight on, past the opening in the hedge, as though the
men were not there, and on through the pleasant field.  But the faces
of those men were impressed on his mind, and he felt he should know
them again.

Certainly their conversation had given him something to think of, but
the chief thing now that he had to do was to purchase provisions, and
have them conveyed to the house.  Should he find much damage done at
the village?

That question was soon answered, for, on arriving there, he found that
the flood had passed it almost entirely by.  Most of the houses were on
fairly high ground, and the river being near, much of the water had
flowed thither.  Yet some of the cottages in the lower part had
suffered, and Alfy heard much of them, and of a farmhouse and its
buildings, which had also been flooded.  He heard, too, of the
difficulties which had been experienced in saving some of the animals.

He knew that farmhouse well.  He and his sisters had played there with
the children who lived under its pleasant roof.  The flood had come so
suddenly, and the house wherein Alfy lived was in such a retired spot,
that no one seemed to have thought of it and its inmates.  He therefore
found himself listened to with eagerness and some surprise when he told
of their condition.

"And how am I to send you these goods, then?" asked Mr. Daw, the
tradesman of whom Alfy had been ordering a supply of grocery.  "I could
send them by cart, but I have not a boat."

"Do you know where I could borrow one?" asked Alfy anxiously.

Well, Mr. Daw was not sure.  There were a few boats on the river, but
how was one to be brought from thence to the flood near the house?

Nevertheless, he thought of a few persons to whom Alfy could apply, and
the boy left him, after arranging that he would return later to point
out the spot where the goods were to be taken.

Alfy bought a few more goods, a joint of meat among them, at some other
shops, directing them to be taken to Mr. Daw, who had promised to send
all together.  The boy had then a troublesome task; it was to find a
boat or some means of conveying the provisions to the Island House.  He
had not time to talk much to any of the acquaintances and friends he
met, though they were greatly interested in the condition of affairs at
his home, and various were the directions he received as to the best
means of getting a boat.

The river was a small one.  It was stony in parts, so that there was
not much boating.  Still there were one or two kept at points along its
course, and Alfy found himself, at length, asking a jolly-looking old
gentleman, to whom he had been directed, but whom he did not know at
all, if he would lend his boat, and telling him why it was wanted.

"Eh! what! house all surrounded by water?  Quite an island, eh?  That's
what we used to learn at school--Island House, eh?"

"Yes, that is what we call it," laughed Alfy, somewhat reassured by the
jolly old gentleman's cheerfulness and geniality.

"Of course I'll lend the boat," said the old gentleman.  "That's what
we've got to do, help one another--and mind you think of that, my boy;
but the question is, how can you get it up to the house?"

"I heard that the flood was running into the river," replied Alfy, "so
I thought I could row up that way."

"What! you row up against the flood!" exclaimed the jolly old
gentleman; "you can't do it."

"I can try," said Alfy.

"Well, I might try and help you, but I am not much of a rower, and my
son--it is he, really, who uses the boat--he is away from home.  I
question if I could pull my own weight.  Most mysterious thing this
flood.  Where does it come from?  How did it happen?"

So Alfy told what he had heard beside the hedge.

"Eh! what! eh! this is getting serious!  One of the banks of Tarnwick
reservoir burst!  One man saying it is because of another's
carelessness!  This must be seen to.  What sort of men were they?
Should you know them again?"

And the jolly old gentleman who was now looking very serious, drew from
Alfy all he knew about the men he had heard talking by the hedge.

"I must see to this quickly," said the old gentleman.  "Send a
policeman after them.  Take the boat, my lad, and keep her as long as
she is of any use to you.  Good-bye, and good luck."  And away he went.

Knowing that speed was very necessary, Alfy decided to try and row up
the boat at once.  At first, he thought he would seek help from some
friends in the village.  Then he determined not to do so.  The village
was some little distance from the jolly old gentleman's house, and some
time, he thought, would be wasted in going to and fro.  So he jumped in
the boat, and cast off.

This was a case, however, of "more haste, less speed."  If he had
obtained assistance he would have made much better progress.  The
stream was against him, and he found it hard work pulling against it.
But nothing seemed to daunt this boy's pluck.

"Put your back into it," he remembered an old boatman said, when last
summer's holiday he and his sisters were rowing on a tidal river at a
seaside resort, and now indeed he strove hard to put his back into his
rowing.

He was certainly making progress.  To escape the force of the current
as far as possible he was creeping along by the shore.  He was thinking
whether he would row as near as he could to the village, and then jump
out and tell Mr. Daw he had secured a boat, or whether he should row on
to where he had left the tub and bath.

"I want to have as little distance to row the laden boat as I can," he
said; "and I cannot take anyone to the house unless they will stay
there, as we shall want the boat.  What fun we will have to-morrow
rowing about, and going for milk and things!  I will point out the spot
to Mr. Daw's man where they can be brought."

He was just considering which course he should pursue when suddenly his
boat was stopped, and he heard some words which almost sent his heart
jumping to his mouth.

"I say, youngster, what was it you heard me and my mate say this
morning?"




CHAPTER V.

WITH TIED WRISTS.

Alfy turned.  Yes, one of the men he had heard talking beside the
hedge, that morning, was leaning from the bank, and had stopped the
boat.

He looked lowering and threatening.

"You don't budge an inch," growled he, "till you've told me what you
have been to Squire Watkins's for."

"To borrow this boat."

"Something else as well," said the man.  "What did you hear me and my
mate saying this morning, and what have you told about it?"

"What right have you to ask me?" replied Alfy sturdily.

"I'll soon show you the right," exclaimed the man gruffly, at the same
time raising his hand.  "Now, then, out with it!"

"Out with what?" said Alfy doggedly.

Bang!  Alfy felt a heavy blow on his head, which made the fire flash
from his eyes, and nearly knocked him overboard; but, tingling with
pain and indignation, he swept round the oar he held in his right hand,
and struck the man sharply on the shoulder.

His assailant seized the oar, and a smart struggle ensued, in which the
man's superior strength and position enabled him to be victorious.  He
wrested the oars from Alfy, and then, after cuffing him soundly, and
calling him an "insolent young warmint," tied him tightly to the skiff
with the boat-rope--which is commonly called the painter.

Alfy, smarting with the injustice of the attack, managed to administer
a few wholesome kicks to his assailant during the struggle.  Then a
long, low whistle sounded, and the man hurried away, leaving the boy
bound and aching in the boat.

The day was now fast wearing on, and the sun was beginning to sink in
the heavens.  As Alfy lay back in the boat his mind was racked with
anxiety about the provisions, and his promises to take back food to the
Island House.  His sisters and Mansy might starve if he could not get
the provisions to them.  Then he shouted aloud to attract attention.

No answer came.  His voice seemed borne back upon him as from an empty
void.  Again and again he called until he grew weary with shouting, and
sickened with suspense and anxiety and disappointment.  He seemed as
far from his kind here as if he were alone in the deserts of Arabia.

Then he bethought him once more of self-help.  "I wonder if I could
free myself," he said.  "I have got over several difficulties lately,
perhaps I can get over this one also."  He struggled upwards to a
sitting position, and looked at his bonds.  His wrists and ankles were
tied pretty firmly, and one end of the rope was of course fastened to
the boat.

"I suppose that rascal tied me up like this to give himself time to
escape," said Alfy thoughtfully, as he looked down at the rope.  "He
thinks I know a lot about him, and will tell what I know, and he wants
to get a good start.  I wonder if I could undo these knots with my
teeth?  They crack nuts, why not untie knots?  I will try."

[Illustration: "'I WONDER IF I COULD UNDO THESE KNOTS WITH MY TEETH?  I
WILL TRY.'"]

Happily his teeth were strong and sharp--teeth which many an older
person would have envied.  He was plucky and persevering also, and he
set to work with a will to gnaw, or unfasten, or "worry" open the tough
knots which bound him.

It was a stiff job, and a tiring one too.  But he kept on pluckily, and
would not give up.  The sun sank lower in the heavens, and the
beautiful summer afternoon wore on.  "Oh! how they will wonder what has
become of me at home!" he sighed.  "I must be quick," and he redoubled
his efforts.

But he found the task too difficult.  The rope was hard and tough, and
time was fast passing.  His teeth and jaws quite ached with the
unwonted use to which he was putting them.  So after thinking over
another plan he changed his tactics entirely.

Though his wrists were tied, his fingers were comparatively free; he
could, for instance, grasp firmly with them anything that was not very
large.  He had noticed that the end of the rope tethering the boat had
been tied to the bough of a young willow near the water's edge.  He
resolved to break that bough, and then slowly work the boat along by
pulling at the grass, reeds, or anything on the bank.  In a short time
he carried out the first part of his programme.

Compared with gnawing at the hard rope, the twisting of the supple
bough backwards and forwards, until he wrested it from the parent stem,
was but a light task.  It was more difficult to work the boat along
against the stream.  Yet by patience and pluck and perseverance--the
three "p's" that all young folks should seek to acquire--he managed to
succeed.

"Should that man come back to trouble me," he said, "he will find me
gone; that will be something.  Still I do not quite see how I am to get
the things for the house, tied as I am to this boat."

Pluckily he pulled at the grass and reeds, and worked the boat along.
When he had gone some distance from the point where the man had
fastened the boat, he shouted again, and he continued to shout at
intervals.  But no cry answered his own.  There was no sound but the
lapping of the water against the boat or the murmur of the wind.

So some time passed.  Alfy was getting very weary and hungry.  There
seemed no chance of help coming to him, and the situation was the more
vexing, as he felt that his knife in his pocket, if he could but have
got it, would soon have made short work of the knots.  But in the
circumstances the knife might have been left at the house, for all the
good it was to him.

At length he came to the place where the flood poured into the river.
"Hurrah!" he cried, "this does look like making progress.  Now I will
try and get as near as I can to the house."

It was at times more difficult to make progress on the flood than on
the stream, for there was no decided bank such as edged the river; but
he took advantage where he could of anything on the brink of the water,
such as a hurdle or a bush, a stile or a hedge, and pluckily kept at
his work.

In the village, Mr. Daw was getting quite fidgety at Alfy's absence.

"What can have happened to the lad?" said he.  "The boy would surely
not be so long in finding a boat, and if he could not find one he would
have been here to say so.  Jones, just you put all these things in the
pony cart and get as near as you can to Fairglen."  Fairglen was the
right and proper name of the Island House.

"He has evidently been to other shops," continued Mr. Daw.  "Here's a
large sirloin of beef from Smithers, and quite a cargo of bread from
Deane's, and vegetables and fruit from Wilson's.  Why, good gracious
me!  one would think they were going to stand a siege up at Fairglen.
I 'spect it is as the lad says, they've got nothing at all to eat.
What can be keeping the boy I can't think."

"Prap's he's tumbled into the water, please, sir, and got drownded,"
drawled out Jones slowly.

"Get on quickly and put these things in the cart," said his master
sharply.  Jones' slow ways and stupid remarks generally annoyed Mr. Daw.

In quick time the goods for the Island House were packed in the
grocer's little cart, and the slow Jones seated himself in front.
"Drive as near to Fairglen as you can," said his master, "and shout
aloud to attract attention.  Now, mind you deliver the goods quickly."

"As quickly as I can," replied Jones, a grin slowly spreading over his
expansive face.

Thus it came about in time that while Alfy was slowly working his way
along by the brink of the flood, the well-meaning but rather stupid
Jones was staring in profound astonishment at the tub and the tin bath
Alfy had left in the morning.

"Well, I never!" exclaimed Jones.  "They be rum boats, they be!"

He had driven the cart up the lane as far as he could, and after
tethering the horse, was now rambling beside the water.

"But how I'm to carry the meat and taters and sugars over to the house
in them things I don't know!"

Then he remembered his master's injunction to shout, and he shouted
accordingly.  "I wish I knew where that young gent had got to!"
continued Jones, and again he raised his hoarse voice, and shouted.
"Why, what's that 'ere?" he exclaimed.  "Is it an ecker, or is it the
young gent?"

Again he shouted, as loud as he could this time, and then paused.  Yes,
faint and clear came an answering shout.  There was no mistake this
time!  "Why, there he be!" exclaimed Jones in astonishment.  "There he
be! there he be!"

Then he began to move slowly in the direction of the shout, and called
aloud again.  The answer was louder and more distinct this time.

"I be getting nearer to him," chuckled Jones, "that I be!"

But when presently he came close enough to see the young boatman
distinctly he stood still in complete amazement, with eyes and mouth
wide open.  The sapient Jones had had other things to astonish him
considerably to-day, what with the flood and the tub and the bath, but
this beat all.  Here was Alfy tied to the boat, and labouring with
bound wrists to work the skiff along.

"Don't stand staring there!" cried Alfy.  "Can't you give me a hand?"

"Well I never!" exclaimed Jones.  "Whatever did you tie yourself like
that for?"

"Tie myself!" replied Alfy impatiently; "I didn't tie myself.  Come,
cut the rope quickly, and help me along."

"I ain't got no knife!"

"Oh, get mine out of my pocket, and do be quick, please."

"Well, I never did see anything like this afore!" spluttered Jones, as
he tumbled into the boat.  "My stars! however did you get tied up like
this 'ere?"

Alfy did not vouchsafe any explanation, but gave him directions as to
getting the knife quickly, and cutting the rope.

"Oh, how jolly!" he exclaimed, as he rose and stretched himself, when,
after several clumsy efforts on Jones' part, he was at last made free.

"Now, can you row?" he continued briskly.

"How fur do 'ee want to go?"

"As far as a tub and a bath----"

"I see 'em!" interrupted Jones gleefully.

"Well, I want to get there, and then to hurry to Mr. Daw for some
things," exclaimed Alfy.

"Things for Fairglen!" asked Jones, "'cos I got 'em, meat and taters
and all!"

"Oh, that's right!  Where are they?"

"In the cart, not far off."

"Well, can you row this boat, or shall we tow it along?  Perhaps that
will be best."

"Oh, I can pull with the rope," said Jones; "pull the boat and you too;
you look tired enough."

So now, after his hard work, Alfy was able to lie back delightfully at
his ease in the boat, and feel he was being drawn quickly along.

When they reached the two clumsy crafts Alfy had left in the morning he
found them quite high and dry.  "The flood is subsiding," he said.
"Perhaps by to-morrow this time the water will all have gone!"

"P'raps it will," was Jones' reply, "and p'raps it won't.  But I
'spects reservore's pretty nigh empty now."

"Oh, you've heard it's the reservoir?" exclaimed Alfy.  "Do you know
how the water came to flow out?"

"I heerd as how the wall looking this way suddenly bust," answered
Jones, "and the water all rushed down here."

"But don't you know how the wall came to burst?" persisted Alfy.

"No-o; I can't say as how I do," replied Jones slowly, rubbing his head
and knitting his brows as though deeply pondering the knotty point.

"Well, now, we must hasten on," said Alfy.  "Where are those things for
the house?  Are they far?"

"They are in the cart in the lane."

"How can they be brought here?" asked Alfy.  "Shall I help?  Can't you
bring the pony and cart through that gate?  Let us be quick!"

"I think as how you and I must carry them here in lots," drawled
slow-witted Jones.  "I don't think pony and cart could come."

"Well, be sharp then!" urged Alfy, springing from the boat.

"Why, I do believe Mansy can see us from the house."  And he shouted,
and waved his handkerchief.

"Now, come on," cried he, "and show me where the things are."

The transferring of the goods from Mr. Daw's cart took some time, and
made the youths very tired, for it was some little distance off.  But
Alfy was determined to start for the house as quickly as possible, and
continued to urge on the slow-coach Jones; so that the task was
accomplished more speedily than he had thought would be the case.

But then a new difficulty presented itself.  Alfy wished to tie the tub
and bath to the boat and take them back to the house, but he found that
if he did so, wearied as he was, he could not row the laden boat
against the flood.  So he was finally obliged to take Jones with him.
Even then the task was difficult, for Jones was not an expert oarsman.

At length, however, the house was reached, and with joy and gladness,
shoutings and hearty congratulations, the goods were borne in through
the window, and on to the table as before.  Mansy and Alfy's sisters
were rejoiced to see him.  He had been so long away they feared some
accident had befallen him; but he did not tell what had happened until
Jones had gone.

For Jones had to go back, and of course he went in the boat.  This was
against Alfy's plan, but he could not help it.  Jones could not leave
the pony all night, and he could not navigate Alfy's tub.  So promising
to send some one with the boat in the morning, he departed.

Yet, if Alfy had known what would happen with that boat in the night he
would have gone with Jones, and tired as he was, would have brought it
back.  But he did not know; and after a hearty supper all the inmates
of the Island House retired to bed.

They had hardly passed out of their beauty sleep--_i.e._, the slumber
before midnight--when, as the clocks were striking twelve, and an early
chanticleer was crowing for the morn, Edie was awakened by some
mysterious sounds--sounds as of something bumping against the walls of
the house outside.




CHAPTER VI.

AN UNWELCOME VISITOR.

She listened.  Yes, it was so.  Distinctly she heard something knock
against the wall outside and underneath her window.

Her first thought was to arouse her brother.  "But he must be so
tired," she said; so she decided to awaken Mansy instead.

The good woman was sleeping in the room next to Edie's, so that it
would not be very difficult for the little maiden to go to her.

Edie sprang from her bed, her heart beating fast, and was creeping
along to Mansy's room, when, noticing the moon shining brightly, she
thought she would look out and see if she could discover what had
bumped against the wall.  Just now everything was very quiet.

Cautiously, therefore, she peeped out of her window.  No one was to be
seen, and the water in the moonlight looked very peaceful and still.
But just underneath was a boat--the very boat, as it seemed to her,
that Alfy had used that evening.

"Oh, I expect that boy from Mr. Daw's brought it back," she said; "that
is all.  How foolish of me to be frightened.  I expect he got another
boat and rowed this one back, and has now returned.  I hear no sound
down below.  He must have gone.  It was very kind of him to bring the
boat.  I don't think I need wake Mansy now.  Everything seems very
quiet."

So the little maiden crept back to bed, and secure in the idea that she
had solved what had seemed to her something of a mystery, she was soon
sound asleep again.

But in the early morning, when the busy-minded Mansy, anxious to get
forward with the work of the day, descended to the kitchen, what was
her amazement and horror, to discover a man lying at full length, and
fast asleep, on the table.

Her first impulse was to seize the handy broom, and either sweep him
away in some mysterious manner into the water, or else challenge him to
mortal combat; but wiser counsels prevailed.  Mansy thought of a little
plan; and her worthy face looked quite knowing as, chuckling to
herself, she hastily removed all the food from the room, and then
carefully locked the door from the outside.

"Now, there is my gentleman safe and sound," she said.  "If he gets out
of the window he falls into the water and is drownded; while o' course
we must see that he doesn't break the door down while Master Alfy is
fetching a policeman; so there he is.  Horrid idjot! what did he want
to come here for; and how did he come?"

A glance outside showed her the boat, and showed her also that the
water was certainly subsiding.

"That's a mercy!" said Mansy; "but, oh! what a mess the garden and
everything will be in!"

The interior of the house showed that Mansy had been busy, for it
presented a much more comfortable and tidy appearance than when she
returned.  A quantity of the water had been bailed out through the
windows; and the cracks of the doors had been tightly plugged to
prevent water trickling in again.

To-day Mansy wished to continue her tidying arrangements, and she also
wanted to cook a good dinner.  "Bother the man!" she exclaimed.  "What
a nuisance he is in the kitchen, when I wanted to have everything ready
there!"  And she commenced to boil a little water for breakfast over
her spirit lamp.

Just then the unwelcome visitor gave more evidence of being a nuisance.
He had awakened, and finding the door locked, and no means of egress
but into the water, he began knocking the panels of the portal to
attract attention.

"Knock away, my gentleman, knock away!" said Mansy.  "You won't get out
except into a policeman's arms, I can tell you!"

The noise soon brought down the children, and Mansy speedily explained
the position of affairs.

"Then it was somebody I heard in the night," exclaimed Edie.  "I
thought of waking you, Mansy."  And she told her experience during the
dark watches.

"As things have turned out, it does not matter," said Mansy; "and I am
glad you did not wake me.  Out he doesn't come 'cept into a policeman's
arms.  Do you hear that, you wagabone?"

"I'll break the door down," he shouted, "if you don't open it."  And he
continued to knock loudly.

"Why," said Alfy, "that is like the voice of the man who treated me so
badly yesterday.  I wonder if it is he!  Yes, I do believe it is," he
added, as he heard the man shout again.  "Oh, we must keep the door
fast.  Let us put chairs and tables against it!"

"It will be of no use for you to break the door," cried Alfy aloud,
"for we are going to put things against it!  What did you come here
for?"

"I didn't mean no harm," grumbled the man.  "I haven't took nothing.  I
only come for a sleep."  Then after a pause he commenced to knock the
door more heavily than before.

"Be quick, Master Alfy; oh, do be quick, and get a policeman!  We can
pile up things against the door," and Mansy commenced at once to drag a
table towards it.  "I have put some breakfast ready for you in the
dining-room.  Take something to eat as you go along."

So in a very short time Alfy found himself sculling the boat along to
the shore.  He noticed that the flood had much subsided during the
night.  Indeed, but for the fact that the house lay in a hollow, the
water might perhaps have gone down before.

He found the village policeman more easily than some of the blue-coated
brethren are said to be found.  He was at his house, rather tired after
his perambulations during the night.  Alfy quickly told his errand, and
described the man.

"Why, I b'lieves it's the very cove as I'm in search of!" exclaimed the
policeman.  "Looked for him all night, I have; I 'spects he thought
your house was empty in the flood, and he should be safe there for the
night.  But he's reg'lar caught hisself in a trap, ain't he?"

And policeman 451 Z. of the Blankshire constabulary chuckled.  Then he
took out a pair of handcuffs, looked at them, turned them round,
clinked them together, and slipped them back into his pocket.

"If," said he, "it is as how my man don't go quiet they may come in
handy."

"Hadn't we better hurry on?" asked Alfy.  "He may break the door down
and overturn the things."

"I don't think he will," said the policeman, shaking his head.
"Howsomdever, we will go."  And taking a long drink of cold tea, he put
some bread and cheese in his pocket, and exclaimed, "Now I'm ready."

The two sallied forth, and before very long they had reached the house.
As the policeman had anticipated, the man had not beaten the door down,
and when it was opened he walked almost literally into the policeman's
arms, as Mansy had said.

"I'll go quiet," said the man, who in fact looked tired and hungry.
"You needn't put on them things," glancing at the shining steel
handcuffs.  "I s'pose, missus," he said, looking at Mansy, "you
couldn't give a half-starved creetur a crust o' bread, could ye?  I'm
dead beat!"

"Well! did you ever!" exclaimed Mansy.  "After breaking into one's
house, then axin' for bread!  The imperence!"

"Now then, come on!" said the policeman; "you'll have some food at the
lock-up.  Get into that boat, smart!"

Airy had looked closely at the man.  Yes, it was the same who had tied
him in the boat yesterday.  Should he give him something to eat?  The
boy hesitated.  The man looked very worn and weary.  Then the lad
thought of the words,--"If thine enemy hunger, feed him."  He hesitated
no longer.  He slipped into the dining-room, took a large slice of
bread, and pressed it into the man's hand just as the policeman hustled
him off.  Then he hurried away, scarcely hearing the man's thanks,
though seeing his look of surprise.

That day was a busy one for the inhabitants of the Island House.  Mansy
was very anxious that as far as possible every sign of the damage done
by the water should be repaired and cleared away.  So she kept the
young people well employed.  But the Island House, however, was rapidly
becoming an Island House no longer, for the flood continued to subside
on every hand.


When the man was examined before the magistrates, of course Alfy had to
be present to testify what he knew about the matter, and the causes of
the flood were thoroughly investigated.  To do him justice, the man
himself did not attempt to conceal anything.  His fault was chiefly
that of gross carelessness and neglect of duty.  The wall of the
reservoir had showed signs of weakness which he had failed to report to
his superior officers.  In fact, he had seen but little of those signs,
for, instead of keeping to his work, he had wasted his time in
drinking; and on the afternoon when the wall burst he was loitering in
a public-house some distance off.  He hid in the Island House for the
night, not knowing anyone was still there.

The heavy rains of an exceptionally wet July had increased the volume
of water in the reservoir to a great extent, and placed a much greater
strain on the weakened wall.  Hence it came to pass that when the
increased pressure came, the wall not being repaired and strengthened,
gave way with a crash.  As the man had entered the Island House, he was
committed for trial at the next assizes, and Alfy was complimented on
his bravery and cleverness.

Next morning, when the children came down, they were quite astonished
to find that the water had all disappeared, and the garden and grounds
looked very strange and muddy after their long and unusual bath.

"Why! where has the flood gone to?" exclaimed Edie.  "It has quite
vanished away in the night."

"It was subsiding quickly yesterday," said Alfy.

"Now that we have done up the damage in the house, we must see what we
can do for the garden," urged Mansy.  "Why here is the postman coming
up the path, just as if nothing had happened!"

"A letter from Auntie Rose!" cried Edie, taking the packet from the
postman.  "Perhaps she asks us all to the seaside."

That was exactly what Auntie Rose did ask, as they found when they read
the letter.  She was staying with their cousins in Devonshire, and
thought they might come at once, as she knew of suitable apartments for
them.  Their parents, too, who were on the Continent, might perhaps
join them there soon.

"Oh, that will be jolly!" cried the children.

"And when we come back," said Alfy, "I expect all signs of the flood
will have gone.  It has not been a bad time, though, has it, Mansy?"

"Perhaps not so very bad, Master Alfy," said Mansy, laughing; "only I
could not abear that rockety tub.  Now let us tidy the garden."




THE END.











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Island House, by F. M. Holmes

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ISLAND HOUSE ***

***** This file should be named 26627.txt or 26627.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/6/2/26627/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
