The Project Gutenberg EBook of Government Documents in Small Libraries, by 
Charles Wells Reeder

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Government Documents in Small Libraries
       Reprinted from Report of Board of Library Commissioners
       of Ohio for the Year ending November 15, 1909.

Author: Charles Wells Reeder

Release Date: September 7, 2008 [EBook #26551]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GOVT DOCUMENTS IN SMALL LIBRARIES ***




Produced by Gerard Arthus, Richard Prairie and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    Government Documents
    in
    Small Libraries


    Government Documents
    in
    Small Libraries
    BY
    CHARLES WELLS REEDER

    Reprinted from Report of Board of Library Commissioners of Ohio for the
    year ending November 15, 1909.

    The Springfield Publishing Company,
    State Printers.
    Springfield, Ohio:
    1910.




Government Documents in Small Libraries

_By CHARLES WELLS REEDER,
Assistant Reference Librarian,
Ohio State University._

[Substance of an address before a meeting of librarians held under the
auspices of the Library Organizer of the Ohio Library Commission, Ohio
State University, October 8, 1909.]

The problem of government publications in the small libraries has been
discussed at much length by librarians, but it is still far from a
definite solution. In fact, there can be no general settlement of many
phases of this question, for each and every library must decide what
its own policy and attitude shall be toward this class of publications.

It is generally admitted that some libraries ought to have all the
publications that are made for distribution, and therefore a system of
depository libraries is maintained by the government. The libraries
which are not favored with this privilege are compelled to make a
selection from the great number of documents and there is the essence
of the problem for discussion here. The question of what to get
involves the selection of certain publications which will be useful to
present patrons of the library and the acquisition of those for which a
demand can be created. For instance, if the library is located in a
rural section, there will be a big demand for publications relating to
agriculture, and a larger proportion of such documents will be secured
than for other subjects. If the students of the high school are
interested in debating present day questions, the publications of the
government relating to the existing political and economic conditions
will be in demand. In the final analysis, the librarian must feel the
pulse of the community, as it were, and secure the classes of
government material which correspond most nearly to the demand. At the
same time, by making use of bibliographies, of department lists of
publications and of the reference section in the Documents Office, the
demand for this class of literature can be materially increased and
documents secured which are not already in the library.

The purpose of this discussion is to suggest a list of government
publications which will be of use in a small library. Before doing so,
the various methods of securing documents must be mentioned, as the way
will be indicated with each document serial in the following list.
First of all, there is the system of depository distribution which is
based on the act of January 12, 1895. The idea is to place in all
sections of the country complete collections of all public documents
which are printed and made for distribution. This privilege is granted
by law or through the request of senators and representatives. The
second way in which large numbers of documents are distributed is
through the congressional quota. This practice is a very old one, being
used for the first time in 1791. Each member of Congress is given a
quota of all documents published by that body, the number varying with
each document. These are distributed by the order of the congressmen
and are sent out under their franks. As a rule, the libraries will
receive very prompt and courteous attention from their representative
in Congress to any request made for publications. Thirdly, the
departments and bureaus have mailing lists including public officials,
institutions of various kinds and interested people. Usually a request
by a library to be placed upon such a list is granted; if not, a letter
to the congressman will bring the desired result. Finally, the
Superintendent of Documents is authorized to sell the government
publications at a price sufficient to cover the actual expense of
paper, press work and binding. The amount is always small because the
main costs of typesetting and stereotyping are eliminated from the
price. There are some publications which are secured by sale only, this
rule applying to libraries as well as to individuals.

The list of publications which will be useful is as follows: The
_Farmers' Bulletins_ of the Department of Agriculture are brief popular
articles which give in simple, concise language the results of
investigations and experiments. They also outline methods for farm
procedure and offer instructions and suggestions for the practical
farmer. The annual edition of these bulletins is over six and one half
million copies. By law eighty per cent. of these are placed at the
disposal of the members of Congress, the remaining twenty per cent.
being in the hands of the Secretary of Agriculture. Libraries will be
placed on the mailing list, or single copies will be sent on
application to a senator, representative or delegate, or to the
secretary of the department. An _Index to Farmers' Bulletins 1-250_ was
issued as _Bulletin 8_ of the Division of Publications, Department of
Agriculture; _Circular No. 4_ of this Division is a _Farmers' Bulletin
Subject Index_, and contains a list of the subjects of the _Bulletins_
arranged alphabetically. It is revised at frequent intervals. The
Library of Congress issues printed cards for the _Farmers' Bulletins_.

The _Yearbook_ of the Department of Agriculture is virtually an annual
encyclopedia of popular, timely articles on special topics covering the
year's work of the Department and the year's progress in agriculture.
The law provides for an edition of 500,000 copies, but under the new
system of public printing, the actual number issued is 300,000. The
Department has 30,000 and the remainder is placed at the order of the
members of Congress. Applications to either source will be filled, but
requests had better be sent to the congressmen first. Two indexes to
the _Yearbook_ have been prepared: _Bulletin 7_, Division of
Publications covers the annual volumes for the period, 1894-1900, and
_Bulletin 9_ of the same Division, the years 1901-1905. Catalog cards
for all the articles can be secured from the Library of Congress.

The Division of Publications, Department of Agriculture, issues
_Circular No. 2_, _Publications for Free Distribution_, which gives the
titles of such publications. They are sent free as long as the edition
lasts, application being made to the Secretary of Agriculture.
_Circular No. 3_ is _Publications for Sale_. These can be purchased
from the Superintendent of Documents, the remittances being sent by
postal money orders, express orders, New York draft, or in currency,
but never in stamps. There is also a _Monthly List of Publications_
issued by the Department of Agriculture, which will be sent to any
library free. Through these three lists a librarian can keep in touch
with the publications of the most active publishing department of the
government and secure the latest available information for the library
patrons.

The _Annual Report_ of the American Historical Association is devoted
to papers by historians of national fame, to reports of the Public
Archives Commission, and to the publication of historical
bibliographical enterprises. For the students of American history no
one set of government documents can be more valuable. The edition is
rather limited, the law providing for 5,500 copies. As the Smithsonian
Institution has so many exchanges, these reports are best secured from
the quota allowed to Congressmen.

The International Bureau of American Republics is not essentially a
United States government bureau, but one in which twenty-one of the
republics of the Western Hemisphere have an interest. The _Monthly
Bulletin_ is printed in four languages--English, Spanish, Portuguese
and French. It contains the latest information on the commerce, laws,
new enterprises and general development of each republic. It is
essentially a magazine of Central and South American events. This
Bulletin cannot be obtained free, as the bureau sells nearly all its
publications. The subscription price for the English edition is $2.00
per year. A small library does not need the foreign edition.
Communications should be addressed to the Director of the Bureau.

No library can afford to be without the publications of the Bureau of
the Census. The volumes of the decennial censuses contain the
statistical records of the nation's growth and development. If the full
set of reports is not wanted, by all means the _Abstract_ should be
secured, as it contains the summaries. The series of _Bulletins_ issued
by the permanent bureau contains the recent statistics, estimates, and
are the source for much of the data found in the annual newspaper
almanacs. These publications are supplied free of charge to libraries
upon application to the Director of the Census or to members of
Congress. The Department of Commerce and Labor has issued a _List of
Publications_ ... _available for distribution_; the Bureau has also
issued _Publications Tenth, Eleventh and Twelfth Censuses and Permanent
Bureau_. The publications no longer available are marked with an
asterisk.

The _Annual Reports_ of the Civil Service Commission contain the data
on the historical and statistical growth of the classified government
service, the number and character of examinations, the appointments to
service, the rules covering civil service appointment and the legal
decisions of the Commission. The Commission has twenty thousand copies
of its annual report for distribution, applications for it being made
directly to the Commission. The _Manual of Examinations_ is issued
January 1st and July 1st of each year, and give the date, place,
character and scope of scheduled examinations. It will be found
indispensable for those desiring to enter the government service. It
will be furnished gratuitously by the Commission.

The _Congressional Directory_ is issued in three editions for a long
session, and in two for a short one. It contains the essential facts
necessary for a valuable reference book on the government. There are
biographical sketches of each senator, representative and delegate in
Congress; committee arrangements are given for all members; officials
and attaches of both houses are listed; biographical sketches are given
for the heads of the executive departments; there is a roster of the
chief officers in each department and in the consular and diplomatic
service; finally, there is a brief outline of the official duties of
each department, bureau and division in the government. The number
issued is determined by the Joint Committee on Printing, but inasmuch
as the _Directory_ is issued as a Senate document, it can be secured by
application to a member in Congress. If not supplied in this way, it
can be purchased from the Superintendent of Documents. The last edition
is the one to be secured.

The _Congressional Record_ is published daily when Congress is in
session and in a collected edition when the session is over. It is a
verbatim report of all that takes place in Congress, and ought to be
placed with the daily papers in a library. An _Index_ is prepared every
two weeks and one for the entire session. Besides the references to the
bills, the index contains a history of each measure and the number of
each committee report and document presented. Each senator has ninety
copies and each representative and delegate has sixty-two copies.
Librarians should make application to their congressmen for the
_Record_ at the beginning of each session of Congress, as new mailing
lists are made out at that time.

The _Annual Reports_ of the Bureau of Education are devoted to
statistics concerning the educational system of the United States.
There are also discussions and papers on important educational
movements in other countries. The law provides for an edition of 35,000
copies, 20,000 of which are distributed by the Bureau. The reports from
1867 to 1898 are indexed in _A. L. A. Index_, 2d ed. Since 1906 much of
the descriptive material in the annual reports has been eliminated and
published as _Bulletins_. These contain many late monographs of
importance and the results of study of new problems in education.
Bulletin 2, 1908, is a _List of Publications ... 1867-1907_. The annual
bibliography of education which has been issued for the past eight
years in the Educational Review is now printed as a _Bulletin_ of the
Bureau of Education.

The _Experiment Station Record_, a publication of the Office of
Experiment Stations, gives a technical review of the current literature
of agricultural investigation, not only in the United States, but also
throughout the whole world. It reviews books and annual reports of
governments and the agricultural experiment stations in the various
states and about 1,600 periodicals in twelve or more languages. The
Office maintains a mailing list, and application for publications
should be directed to the Director. The _Record_ is also sold by the
Superintendent of Documents at $1.00 per volume, beginning with July,
1909. Previous volumes are $1.50.

The _Annual Reports_ of the Interstate Commerce Commission cover both
the administrative and the quasi-judicial proceedings of the
Commission. In its administrative features the report presents railroad
statistics, discusses the uniform methods of accounting, and summarizes
the results of enforcing the safety appliance laws, the hours of
service act and the accidents law. Important decisions made during the
year by the Commission and by United States Courts are reviewed. The
reports are furnished gratuitously by the Commission to those who
apply. Another valuable serial is the report on the _Statistics of
Railways in the United States_. It is prepared according to schedules,
and covers the mileage, the amount of railway capital, the earnings and
income, the general expenditures and the accidents. This volume is also
distributed free by the Commission.

The Bureau of Labor issues three serials which ought to be found in
every library. The _Annual Reports_ contain the results of
investigations which the Bureau has made on industrial and social
subjects. The _Special Reports_ are on particular subjects, and are
prepared as requested by the President of the United States or by
either house of Congress. The _Bulletin_ is issued bi-monthly, and
contains the latest information on subjects within the wide field of
labor and not included in the other reports. The _Annual Reports_ and
_Bulletins_ up to 1898 are indexed in the _A. L. A. Index_, 2d ed. The
Bureau issued an _Index_ in 1902 which covers _Annual Reports_ 1-16,
_Bulletins_ 1-39 and _Special Reports_ 1-9. Application for these
publications are best made to the Bureau and handled from its mailing
list.

The most useful publication of the Library of Congress in a small
library is the series of bibliographies compiled in the Division of
Bibliography. They vary in size from approximately complete
bibliographies to small reading lists on questions of current interest.
Inasmuch as they are based on the largest collection of library
materials in the United States, the bibliographies give an idea of
existing references and sources which might not be suggested or even
known in smaller institutions. Through library loans and the judicious
writing for sources, the small library can supply liberal materials for
study from these bibliographies. As to the distribution of these
publications, the Library of Congress makes this statement: "With
certain exceptions, the publications are not distributed gratis, except
to institutions with which the library regularly exchanges." At any
event, they can be purchased from the Superintendent of Documents for
from ten to fifteen cents. The complete list of these bibliographies is
published in the _List of Publications Issued Since 1897_ (by the
Library of Congress).

The _Daily Consular and Trade Reports_ are issued from the Bureau of
Manufactures. These are a collection of reports made by United States
consuls in all parts of the world on matters of commercial and current
importance, such as new inventions, crops, market possibilities and
commercial relations in general. The Bureau will add a library to its
mailing list upon application.

The Bureau of Statistics of the Department of Commerce and Labor issue
two serials which are of use in small libraries. The _Monthly Summary
of Commerce and Finance_ is the leading statistical publication of the
government. It gives a very complete and detailed statistical account
of the foreign commerce of the United States, the internal commerce and
the commerce with the non-contiguous possessions. The _Statistical
Abstract_ covers, in summarized form, most of the important subjects in
the wide field of government activity, and easily ranks as "the most
useful summary of statistics relating to our country that is printed."
The edition is limited to twelve thousand copies--three thousand to the
Senate, six thousand to the House, and the remainder to the Bureau.
Application for both serials can be made directly to the Bureau, and
especially for the _Monthly Summary_.

In conclusion, the librarian that intends to be alive to his
opportunity with government documents will get the _Annual Reports_ of
the Superintendent of Documents for 1907 and 1908 and commit them to
heart. They contain the best explanation of the present plan of
distribution and other problems with these publications that has been
written. The library should receive the series of _Price Lists_ and
_Leaflets_ now being issued by the Documents Office. The one is
virtually a bibliography of some important subjects which the documents
cover; the other is a description of some one document or some class of
more than passing interest. Both show what can be purchased and the
price of the publication. If the library has not received copies of
_Free Lists Nos. 1 to 3_, they should be sent for. They contain a list
of the documents which are offered free of all charge to libraries.
Many rare and useful publications can be secured in this way. Finally,
if possible, subscribe for the _Monthly Catalog of Public Documents_,
which keeps the reading public informed as to what is now being
published by the government, how and where the publications can be
obtained and the purchase price.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Government Documents in Small Libraries, by 
Charles Wells Reeder

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GOVT DOCUMENTS IN SMALL LIBRARIES ***

***** This file should be named 26551.txt or 26551.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/5/5/26551/

Produced by Gerard Arthus, Richard Prairie and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
